THE EUXINE AND THE MARYANDINI : THE Euxine Sea , which in former times had the name of Axenus , from the savage and inhospitable character of the nations living on its borders , by a peculiar whim of nature , which is continually giving way before the greedy inroads of the sea , lies between Europe and Asia .
It was not enough for the ocean to have surrounded the earth , and then deprived us of a considerable portion of it , thus rendering still greater its uninhabitable proportion ; it was not enough for it to have forced a passage through the mountains , to have torn away Calpe from Africa , and to have swallowed up a much larger space than it left untouched ; it was not enough for it to have poured its tide into the Propontis through the Hellespont , after swallowing up still more of the dry land — for beyond the Bosporus , as well , it opens with its insatiate appetite upon another space of immense extent , until the Maeotian lakes unite their ravening waters with it as it ranges far and wide .
SOL That all this has taken place in spite , as it were , of the earth , is manifested by the existence of so many straits and such numbers of narrow passages formed against the will of Nature — that of the Hellespont , being only eight hundred and seventy-five paces in width , while at the two Bosphori ( west and east ) the passage across may be effected by oxen swimming , a fact from which they have both derived their name .
And then besides , although they are thus severed , there are certain points on which these coasts stand in the relation of brotherhood towards each other — the singing of birds and the barking of dogs on the one side can be heard on the other , and an intercourse can be maintained between these two worlds by the medium even of the human voice , if the winds should not happen to carry away the sound thereof .
SOL The length of the borders of the Euxine from the Bosporus to the Lake Maeotis has been reckoned by some writers at fourteen hundred and thirty-eight miles ; Eratosthenes , however , says that it is one hundred less .
According to Agrippa , the distance from Chalcedon to the Phasis is one thousand miles , and from that river to the Cimmerian Bosporus three hundred and sixty .
We will here give in a general form the distances as they have been ascertained in our own times ; for our arms have even penetrated to the very mouth of the Cimmerian Straits .
SOL After passing the mouth of the Bosporus we come to the river Rhebas , by some writers called the Rhesus .
We next come to Psillis , the port of Calpas , and the Sagaris , a famous river , which rises in Phrygia and receives the waters of other rivers of vast magnitude , among which are the Tembrogius and the Gallus , the last of which is by many called the Sangarius .
After leaving the Sagaris the Gulf of the Mariandyni begins , and we come to the town of Heraclea , on the river Lycus ; this place is distant from the mouth of the Euxine two hundred miles .
The sea-port of Acone comes next , which has a fearful notoriety for its aconite or wolf's-bane , a deadly poison , and then the cavern of Acherusia , the rivers Paedopides , Callichorus , and Sonautes , the town of Tium , distant from Heraclea thirty-eight miles , and the river Billis .
SOL PAPHLAGONIA : Beyond this river begins the nation of Paphlagonia , by some writers called Pylaemenia ; it is closed in behind by the country of Galatia .
In it are Mastya , a town founded by the Milesians , and then Cromna , at which spot Cornelius Nepos also places the Heneti , from whom he would have us believe that the Veneti of Italy , who have a similar name , are descended .
The city also of Sesamon , now called Amastris , Mount Cytorus , distant sixty-three miles from Tium , the towns of Cimolis and Stephane , and the river Parthenius .
The promontory of Carambis , which extends a great distance into the sea , is distant from the mouth of the Euxine three hundred and twenty-five miles , or , according to some writers , three hundred and fifty , being the same distance from the Cimmerian Bosporus , or , as some persons think , only three hundred and twelve miles .
There was formerly also a town of the same name , and another near it called Armene ; we now find there the colony of Sinope , distant from Mount Cytorus one hundred and sixty-four miles .
We then come to the river Evarchus , and after that a people of the Cappadocians , the towns of Gaziura and Gazelum , the river Halys , which runs from the foot of Mount Taurus through Cataonia and Cappadocia , the towns of Gangre and Carusa , the free town of Amisus , distant from Sinope one hundred and thirty miles , and a gulf of the same name , of such vast extent as to make Asia assume the form of a peninsula , the isthmus of which is only some two hundred miles in breadth , or a little more , across to the Gulf of Issos in Cilicia .
In all this district there are , it is said , only three races that can rightly be termed Greeks , the Dorians , the Ionians , and the Aeolians , all the rest being of barbarian origin .
To Amisus was joined the town of Eupatoria , founded by Mithridates : after his defeat they were both included under the name of Pompeiopolis .
SOL CAPPADOCIA : Cappadocia has in the interior Archelais , a colony founded by Claudius Caesar , and past which the river Halys flows ; also the towns of Comana , watered by the Sarus , Neocaesarea , by the Lycus , and Amasia , in the region of Gazacene , washed by the Iris .
In Colopene it has Sebastia and Sebastopolis ; these are insignificant places , but still equal in importance to those just mentioned .
In its remaining districts there is Melita , founded by Semiramis , and not far from the Euphrates , Diocaesarea , Tyana , Castabala , Magnopolis , Zela , and at the foot of Mount Argaeus Mazaca , now called Caesarea .
That part of Cappadocia which lies stretched out before the Greater Armenia is called Melitene , before Commagene Cataonia , before Phrygia Garsauritis , Sargarausene , and Cammanene , before Galatia Morimene , where their territories are divided by the river Cappadox , from which this people have taken their name ; they were formerly known as the Leucosyri .
From Neocaesarea above mentioned , the lesser Armenia is separated by the river Lycus .
In the interior also there is the famous river Ceraunus , and on the coast beyond the town of Amisus , the town and river of Chadisia , and the town of Lycastum , after which the region of Themiscyra begins .
SOL THE REGION OF THEMISCYRA , AND THE NATIONS THEREIN : The river Iris brings down to the sea the waters of the Lycus .
In the interior is the city of Ziela , famous for the defeat of Triarius and the victory of C .
Caesar .
Upon the coast there is the river Thermodon , which rises at the fortified place called Phanaroea , and flows past the foot of Mount Amazonius .
There was formerly a town of the same name as the river , and five others in all , Amazonium , Themiscyra , Sotira , Amasia , and Comana , now only a Manteium .
( 4 .
) We find here the nations of the Genetae , the Chalybes , the town of Cotyorum , the nations of the Tibareni and the Mossyni , who make marks upon their bodies , the people called Macrocephali , the town of Cerasus , the port of Chordule , the nations called the Bechires and the Buzeri , the river Melas , the people called the Macrones , and Sidene with its river Sidenus , by which the town of Polemonium is washed , at a distance from Amisus of one hundred and twenty miles .
We next come to the rivers Iasonius on the site of the older city of Side , at the mouth of the Sidenus and Melanthius , and at a distance of eighty miles from Amisus , the town of Pharnacea , the fortress and river of Tripolis ; the fortress and river of Philocalia , the fortress of Liviopolis , but not upon a river , and at a distance of one hundred miles from Pharnacia , the free city of Trapezus , shut in by a mountain of vast size .
Beyond this town is the nation of the Armenochalybes and the Greater Armenia , at a distance of thirty miles .
On the coast , before Trapezus , flows the river Pyxites , and beyond it is the nation of the Sanni Heniochi .
Next comes the river Absarus , with a fortress of the same name at its mouth , distant from Trapezus one hundred and forty miles .
SOL At the back of the mountains of this district is Iberia , while on the coast are the Heniochi , the Ampreutae , the Lazi , the rivers Acampsis , Isis , Mogrus , and Bathys , the nations of the Colchi , the town of Matium , the river Heracleum and the promontory of the same name , and the Phasis , the most celebrated river of Pontus .
This river rises among the Moschi , and is navigable for the largest vessels a distance of thirty-eight miles and a half , and for small ones very much higher up ; it is crossed by one hundred and twenty bridges .
It formerly had many cities of note on its banks , the more famous of which were Tyndaris , Circaion , Cygnus , and Phasis at its mouth .
But the most celebrated of them all was Aea , fifteen miles distant from the sea , where the Hippos and the Cyaneos , rivers of vast size , flow into it from opposite directions .
At the present day its only place of note is Surium , which derives its name from the river which flows at that spot into the Phasis , and up to which place the Phasis is navigable for large vessels , as we have already mentioned .
It receives also some other rivers , wonderful for their number and magnitude , and among them the Glaucus .
At the mouth of the Phasis , at a distance of seventy miles from Absarus , are some islands , which , however , have no name .
After passing this , we come to another river , the Charieis , and the nation of the Salae , by the ancients called Phthirophagi , as also Suani .
The river Chobus flows from the Caucasus through the country of the Suani .
The river Rhoas comes next , then the region of Ecrectice , the rivers Singames , Tarsuras , Astelephus , Chrysorrhoas , the nation of the Absilae , the castle of Sebastopolis , one hundred miles distant from Phasis , the nation of the Sannigae , the town of Cygnus , and the river and town of Penius .
We then come to the tribes of the Heniochi , who are distinguished by numerous names .
SOL THE REGION OF COLICA , THE NATIONS OF THE ACHAEI , AND OTHER NATIONS IN THE SAME PARTS .
Below this lies the region of Pontus known as Colica , in which the mountain chain of Caucasus bends away towards the Riphaean mountains , as we have previously mentioned ; one side running down towards the Euxine and the Lake Maeotis , the other towards the Caspian and the Hyrcanian sea .
The remaining portion of these shores is peopled by savage nations , the Melanchlaeni , and the Coraxi , who formerly dwelt in Dioscurias , near the river Anthemus , now deserted , but once a famous city ; so much so , indeed , that we learn from Timosthenes , that three hundred nations , all of different languages , were in the habit of resorting to it , and in later times we had there one hundred and thirty interpreters for the purpose of transacting business .
There are some authors who are of opinion that this place was built by Amphitus and Telchius , the charioteers of Castor and Pollux , from whom it is generally understood that the nation of the Heniochi sprang .
After passing Dioscurias we come to the town of Heracleium , seventy miles distant from Sebastopolis , and then the Achaei , the Mardi , and the Cercetae , and , behind them , the Cerri and the Cephalotomi .
In the innermost part of this district there was Pityus , a city of very considerable opulence , but destroyed by the Heniochi : behind it are the Epageritae , a people of Sarmatian origin , dwelling upon the range of the Caucasus , and beyond them , the Sauromatae .
It was with these people that Mithridates took refuge in the reign of the Emperor Claudius : and from him we learn that the Thalli join up to them , a people who border on the eastern side upon the mouth of the Caspian sea : he tells us also that at the reflux the channel is dry there .
Upon the coast of the Euxine , near the country of the Cercetae , is the river Icarusa , with the town and river of Hierus , distant from Heracleium one hundred and thirty-six miles .
Next to this , is the promontory of Cruni , after passing which , we find the Toretae upon a lofty ridge of mountains .
The city of Sindos is distant from Hierus sixty-seven miles and a half ; after passing which , we come to the river Setheries .
( 6 .
) From thence to the entrance of the Cimmerian Bosporus the distance is eighty-eight miles and a half .
SOL THE CIMMERIAN BOSPORUS : The length of the peninsula which projects between the Euxine and Lake Maeotis , is not more than sixty-seven miles and a half , and the width across never less than two jugera : it has the name of Eion .
The shores of the Bosporus then take a curve both on the side of Europe and of Asia , thus forming the Maeotis .
The towns at the entrance of the Bosporus are , first Hermonassa , next Cepi , founded by the Milesians , and then Stratoclia and Phanagoria , and the almost deserted town of Apaturos , and , at the extremity of the mouth , Cimmerium , which was formerly called Cerberion .
( 7 .
) We then come to Lake Maeotis , which has been already mentioned in the description of Europe .
SOL LAKE MAEOTIS AND THE ADJOINING NATIONS : After passing Cimmerium , the coast is inhabited by the Maeotici , the Vali , the Serbi , the Arrechi , the Zingi , and the Psessi .
We then come to the river Tanais , which discharges itself into the sea by two mouths , and the banks of which are inhabited by the Sarmatae , the descendants of the Medi , it is said , a people divided into numerous tribes .
The first of these are the Sauromatae Gynaecocratumeni , the husbands of the Amazons .
Next to them are the Aevazae , the Coitae , the Cicimeni , the Messeniani , the Costobocci , the Choatrae , the Zigae , the Dandarii , the Thyssagetae , and the Iyrcae , as far as certain rugged deserts and densely wooded vallies , beyond which again are the Arimphaei , who extend as far as the Riphaean Mountains .
The Scythians call the river Tanais by the name of Silis , and the Maeotis the Temarunda , meaning the " mother of the sea .
" There is a city also at the mouth of the Tanais .
The neighbouring country was inhabited first by the Carians , then by the Clazomenii and Maeones , and after them by the Panticapenses .
SOL There are some writers who state that there are the following nations dwelling around the Maeotis , as far as the Ceraunian mountains ; at a short distance from the shore , the Napitae , and beyond them , the Essedones , who join up to the Colchians , and dwell upon the summits of the mountains : after these again , the Camacae , the Orani , the Autacae , the Mazacasi , the Cantiocae , the Agamathae , the Pici , the Rimosoli , the Acascomarci , and , upon the ridges of the Caucasus , the Itacalae , the Imadochi , the Rami , the Anclacae , the Tydii , the Carastasei , and the Anthiandae .
The river Lagous runs from the Cathaean mountains , and into it flows the Opharus .
Upon it are the tribes of the Cauthadae , and the Opharitae .
Next to these are the rivers Menotharus and Imityes , which flow from the Cissian mountains , among the peoples called the Acdei , the Carnae , the Oscardei , the Accisi , the Gabri , the Gogari , and , around the source of the Imityes , the Imityi , and the Apatraei .
Some writers say that the Auchetae , the Athernei , and the Asampatae , Scythian tribes , have made inroads upon this territory , and have destroyed the Tanaitae and the Inapaei to a man .
Others again represent the Ocharius as running through the Cantici and the Sapaei , and the Tanais as passing through the territories of the Sarcharcei , the Herticei , the Spondolici , the Synhietae , the Anasi , the Issi , the Catetae , the Tagorae , the Caroni , the Neripi , the Agandei , the Mandarei , the Satarchei , and the Spalei .
SOL THE SITUATION OF CAPPADOCIA : We have now gone over the coast which borders upon the Inner Sea , and have enumerated the various nations that dwell thereon ; let us now turn to those vast tracts of land which lie further in the interior .
I do not deny that in my description I shall differ very materially from the ancient writers , but still it is one that has been compiled with the most anxious research , from a full examination into the events which have transpired of late in these countries under the command of Domitius Corbulo , and from information received either from kings who have been sent thence to Rome , as suppliants for our mercy , or else the sons of kings who have visited us in the character of hostages .
SOL We will begin then with the nation of the Cappadocians .
Of all the countries of Pontus , this extends the greatest distance into the interior .
On the left it leaves behind the Lesser and the Greater Armenia , as well as Commagene , and on the right all the nations of the province of Asia which we have previously described .
Spreading over numerous peoples , it rises rapidly in elevation in an easterly direction towards the range of Taurus .
Then passing Lycaonia , Pisidia , and Cilicia , it advances above the district of Antiochia , the portion of it known as Cataonia extending as far as Cyrrhestica , which forms part of that district .
The length of Asia here is twelve hundred and fifty miles , its breadth six hundred and forty .
SOL THE LESSER AND THE GREATER ARMENIA : Greater Armenia , beginning at the mountains known as the Paryadres , is separated , as we have already stated , from Cappadocia by the river Euphrates , and , where that river turns off in its course , from Mesopotamia , by the no less famous river Tigris .
Both of these rivers take their rise in Armenia , which also forms the commencement of Mesopotamia , a tract of country which lies between these streams ; the intervening space between them being occupied by the Arabian Orei .
It thus extends its frontier as far as Adiabene , at which point it is stopped short by a chain of mountains which takes a cross direction ; whereupon the province extends in width to the left , crossing the course of the Araxes , as far as the river Cyrus ; while in length it reaches as far as the Lesser Armenia , from which it is separated by the river Absarus , which flows into the Euxine , and by the mountains known as the Paryadres , in which the Absarus takes its rise .
SOL THE RIVERS CYRUS AND ARAXES : The river Cyrus takes its rise in the mountains of the Heniochi , by some writers called the Coraxici ; the Araxes rises in the same mountains as the river Euphrates , at a distance from it of six miles only ; and after being increased by the waters of the Usis , falls itself , as many authors have supposed , into the Cyrus , by which it is carried into the Caspian Sea .
SOL The more famous towns in Lesser Armenia are Caesarea , Aza , and Nicopolis ; in the Greater Arsamosata , which lies near the Euphrates , Carcathiocerta upon the Tigris , Tigranocerta which stands on an elevated site , and , on a plain adjoining the river Araxes , Artaxata .
According to Aufidius , the circumference of the whole of Armenia is five thousand miles , while Claudius Caesar makes the length , from Dascusa to the borders of the Caspian Sea , thirteen hundred miles , and the breadth , from Tigranocerta to Iberia , half that distance .
It is a well-known fact , that this country is divided into prefectures , called " Strategies ," some of which singly formed a kingdom in former times ; they are one hundred and twenty in number , with barbarous and uncouth names .
On the east , it is bounded , though not immediately , by the Ceraunian Mountains and the district of Adiabene .
The space that intervenes is occupied by the Sopheni , beyond whom is the chain of mountains , and then beyond them the inhabitants of Adiabene .
Dwelling in the valleys adjoining to Armenia are the Menobardi and the Moscheni .
The Tigris and inaccessible mountains surround Adiabene .
To the left of it is the territory of the Medi , and in the distance is seen the Caspian Sea ; which , as we shall state in the proper place , receives its waters from the ocean , and is wholly surrounded by the Caucasian Mountains .
The inhabitants upon the confines of Armenia shall now be treated of .
SOL ALBANIA , IBERIA , AND THE ADJOINING NATIONS : The whole plain which extends away from the river Cyrus is inhabited by the nation of the Albani , and , after them , by that of the Iberi , who are separated from them by the river Alazon , which flows into the Cyrus from the Caucasian chain .
The chief cities are Cabalaca , in Albania , Harmastis , near a river of Iberia , and Neoris ; there is the region also of Thasie , and that of Triare , extending as far as the mountains known as the Paryadres .
Beyond these are the deserts of Colchios , on the side of which that looks towards the Ceraunian Mountains dwell the Armenochalybes ; and there is the country of the Moschi , extending to the river Iberus , which flows into the Cyrus ; below them are the Sacassani , and after them the Macrones , upon the river Absarus .
Such is the manner in which the plains and low country are parcelled out .
Again , after passing the confines of Albania , the wild tribes of the Silvi inhabit the face of the mountains , below them those of the Lubieni , and after them the Diduri and the Sodii .
SOL THE PASSES OF THE CAUCASUS : After passing the last , we come to the Gates of Caucasus , by many persons most erroneously called the Caspian Passes ; a vast work of nature , which has suddenly wrenched asunder in this place a chain of mountains .
At this spot are gates barred up with beams shod with iron , while beneath the middle there runs a stream which emits a most fetid odour ; on this side of it is a rock , defended by a fortress , the name of which is Cumania , erected for the purpose of preventing the passage of the innumerable tribes that lie beyond .
Here , then , we may see the habitable world severed into two parts by a pair of gates ; they are just opposite to Harmastis , a town of the Iberi .
SOL Beyond the Gates of Caucasus , in the Gordyaean Mountains , the Valli and the Suani , uncivilized tribes , are found ; still , however , they work the mines of gold there .
Beyond these nations , and extending as far away as Pontus , are numerous nations of the Heniochi , and , after them , of the Achaei .
Such is the present state of one of the most famous tracts upon the face of the earth .
SOL Some writers have stated that the distance between the Euxine and the Caspian Sea is not more than three hundred and seventy-five miles ; Cornelius Nepos makes it only two hundred and fifty .
Within such straits is Asia pent up in this second instance by the agency of the sea !
Claudius Caesar has informed us that from the Cimmerian Bosporus to the Caspian Sea is a distance of only one hundred and fifty miles , and that Nicator Seleucus contemplated cutting through this isthmus just at the time when he was slain by Ptolemy Ceraunus .
It is a well-known fact that the distance from the Gates of Caucasus to the shores of the Euxine is two hundred miles .
SOL THE ISLANDS OF THE EUXINE : The islands of the Euxine are the Placate or Cyaneae , otherwise called Symplegades , and Apollonia , surnamed Thynias , to distinguish it from the island of that name in Europe ; it is four miles in circumference , and one mile distant from the mainland .
Opposite to Pharnacea is Chalceritis , to which the Greeks have given the name of Aria , and consecrated it to Mars ; here , they say , there were birds that used to attack strangers with blows of their wings .
SOL NATIONS IN THE VICINITY OF THE SCYTHIAN OCEAN : Having now stated all that bears reference to the interior of Asia , let us cross in imagination the Riphaean Mountains , and traverse the shores of the ocean to the right .
On three sides does this ocean wash the coasts of Asia , as the Scythian Ocean on the north , the Eastern Ocean on the east , and the Indian Ocean on the south ; and it is again divided into various names , derived from the numerous gulfs which it forms , and the nations which dwell upon its shores .
A great part of Asia , however , which lies exposed to the north , through the noxious effects of those freezing climates , consists of nothing but vast deserts .
From the extreme north northeast to the point where the sun rises in the summer , it is the country of the Scythians .
Still further than them , and beyond the point where north north-east begins , some writers have placed the Hyperborei , who are said , indeed , by the majority to be a people of Europe .
After passing this point , the first place that is known is Lytarmis , a promontory of Celtica , and next to it the river Carambucis , where the chain of the Riphaean Mountains terminates , and with it the extreme rigour of the climate ; here , too , we have heard of a certain people being situate , called the Arimphaei , a race not much unlike the Hyperborei .
Their habitations are the groves , and the berries their diet ; long hair is held to be disgraceful by the women as well as the men , and they are mild in their manners .
Hence it is that they are reported to be a sacred race , and are never molested even by the savage tribes which border upon them , and not only they , but such other persons as well as may have fled to them for refuge .
Beyond these we come straight to the Scythians , the Cimmerii , the Cisianthi , the Georgi , and a nation of Amazons .
These last extend to the Caspian and Hyrcanian Sea .
SOL THE CASPIAN AND HYRCANIAN SEA : Bursting through , this sea makes a passage from the Scythian Ocean into the back of Asia , receiving various names from the nations which dwell upon its banks , the two most famous of which are the Caspian and the Hyrcanian races .
Clitarchus is of opinion that the Caspian Sea is not less in area than the Euxine .
Eratosthenes gives the measure of it on the south-east , along the coast of Cadusia and Albania , as five thousand four hundred stadia ; thence , through the territories of the Anariaci , the Amardi , and the Hyrcani , to the mouth of the river Zonus he makes four thousand eight hundred stadia , and thence to the mouth of the Jaxartes two thousand four hundred ; which makes in all a distance of one thousand five hundred and seventy-five miles .
Artemidorus , however , makes this sum smaller by twenty-five miles .
Agrippa bounds the Caspian Sea and the nations around it , including Armenia , on the east by the Ocean of the Seres , on the west by the chain of the Caucasus , on the south by that of Taurus , and on the north by the Scythian Ocean ; and he states it , so far as its extent is known , to be four hundred and eighty miles in length , and two hundred and ninety in breadth .
There are not wanting , however , some authors who state that its whole circumference , from the Straits , is two thousand five hundred miles .
SOL Its waters make their way into this sea by a very narrow mouth , but of considerable length ; and where it begins to enlarge , it curves obliquely with horns in the form of a crescent , just as though it would make a descent from its mouth into Lake Maeotis , resembling a sickle in shape , as M .
Varro says .
The first of its gulfs is called the Scythian Gulf ; it is inhabited on both sides , by the Scythians , who hold communication with each other across the Straits , the Nomades being on one side , together with the Sauromatae , divided into tribes with numerous names , and on the other , the Abzoae , who are also divided into an equal number .
At the entrance , on the right hand side , dwell the Udini , a Scythian tribe , at the very angle of the mouth .
Then along the coast there are the Albani , the descendants of Jason , it is said ; that part of the sea which lies in front of them , bears the name of ' Albanian .
' This nation , which lies along the Caucasian chain , comes down , as we have previously stated , as far as the river Cyrus , which forms the boundary of Armenia and Iberia .
Above the maritime coast of Albania and the nation of the Udini , the Sarmatae , the Utidorsi , and the Aroteres stretch along its shores , and in their rear the Sauromatian Amazons , already spoken of SOL The rivers which run through Albania in their course to the sea are the Casius and the Albanus , and then the Cambyses , which rises in the Caucasian mountains , and next to it the Cyrus , rising in those of the Coraxici , as already mentioned .
Agrippa states that the whole of this coast , inaccessible from rocks of an immense height , is four hundred and twenty-five miles in length , beginning from the river Casius .
After we pass the mouth of the Cyrus , it begins to be called the ' Caspian Sea ;' the Caspii being a people who dwell upon its shores .
SOL In this place it may be as well to correct an error into which many persons have fallen , and even those who lately took part with Corbulo in the Armenian war .
The Gates of Iberia , which we have mentioned as the Caucasian , they have spoken of as being called the ' Caspian ,' and the coloured plans which have been sent from those parts to Rome have that name written upon them .
The menaced expedition , too , that was contemplated by the Emperor Nero , was said to be designed to extend as far as the Caspian Gates , whereas it was really intended for those which lead through Iberia into the territory of the Sarmatae ; there being hardly any possibility of approach to the Caspian Sea , by reason of the close juxtaposition of the mountains there .
There are , however , other Caspian Gates , which join up to the Caspian tribes ; but these can only be distinguished from a perusal of the narrative of those who took part in the expedition of Alexander the Great .
SOL ADIABENE : The kingdom of the Persians , by which we now understand that of Parthia , is elevated upon the Caucasian chain between two seas , the Persian and the Hyrcanian .
To the Greater Armenia , which in the front slopes towards Commagene , is joined Sophene , which lies upon the descent on both sides thereof , and next to it is Adiabene , the most advanced frontier of Assyria ; a part of which is Arbelitis , He alludes to the town of Arbela , where , as it is generally said , the army of Darius was defeated by Alexander the Great ; by which engagement the conflict was terminated .
It was the fact , however , that Darius left his baggage and treasures at Arbela , while the battle really took place near the village of Gaugamela , about twenty miles to the north-west of Arbela .
This place still retains its name of Arbil , where Alexander conquered Darius , and which joins up to Syria .
The whole of this country was called Mygdonia by the Macedonians , on account of the resemblance it bore to Mygdonia in Europe .
Its cities are Alexandria , and Antiochia , also called Nisibis ; this last place is distant from Artaxata seven hundred and fifty miles .
There was also in former times Ninus , a most renowned city , on the banks of the Tigris , with an aspect towards the west .
Adjoining the other front of Greater Armenia , which runs down towards the Caspian Sea , we find Atropatene , which is separated from Otene , a region of Armenia , by the river Araxes ; Gazae is its chief city , distant from Artaxata four hundred and fifty miles , and the same from Ecbatana in Media , to which country Atropatene belongs .
SOL MEDIA AND THE CASPIAN GATES : Ecbatana , the capital of Media , was built by king Seleucus , at a distance from Great Seleucia of seven hundred and fifty miles , and twenty miles from the Caspian Gates .
The remaining towns of the Medians are Phazaca , Aganzaga , and Apamea , surnamed Rhagiane .
The reason of these passes receiving the name of " Gates ," is the same that has been stated above .
The chain of mountains is suddenly broken by a passage of such extreme narrowness that , for a distance of eight miles , a single chariot can barely find room to move along : the whole of this pass has been formed by artificial means .
Both on the right hand and the left are overhanging rocks , which look as though they had been exposed to the action of fire ; and there is a tract of country , quite destitute of water , twenty-eight miles in extent .
This narrow pass , too , is rendered still more difficult by a liquid salt which oozes from the rocks , and uniting in a single stream , makes its way along the pass .
Besides this , it is frequented by such multitudes of serpents , that the passage is quite impracticable except in winter .
SOL Joining up to Adiabene are the people formerly known as the ' Carduchi ,' now the Cordueni , in front of whom the river Tigris flows : and next to them are the Pratitae , entitled the Par Odon , who hold possession of the Caspian Gates .
On the other side of these gates we come to the deserts of Parthia and the mountain chain of Cithenus ; and after that , the most pleasant locality of all Parthia , Choara by name .
Here were two cities of the Parthians , built in former times for their protection against the people of Media , Calliope , and Issatis , the last of which stood formerly on a rock .
Hecatompylos , the capital of Parthia , is distant from the Caspian Gates one hundred and thirty-three miles .
In such an effectual manner is the kingdom of Parthia shut out by these passes .
After leaving these gates we find the nation of the Caspii , extending as far as the shores of the Caspian , a race which has given its name to these gates as well as to the sea : on the left there is a mountainous district .
Turning back from this nation to the river Cyrus , the distance is said to be two hundred and twenty miles ; but if we go from that river as far down as the Caspian Gates , the distance is seven hundreds miles .
In the itineraries of Alexander the Great these gates were made the central or turning point in his expeditions ; the distance from the Caspian Gates to the frontier of India being there set down as fifteen thousand six hundred and eighty stadia , to the city of Bactra , commonly called Zariaspa , three thousand seven hundred , and thence to the river Jaxartes five thousand stadia .
SOL NATIONS SITUATE AROUND THE HYRCANIAN SEA : Lying to the east of the Caspii is the region known as Apavortene , in which there is a place noted for its singular fertility , called Dareium .
We then come to the nations of the Tapyri , the Anariaci , the Staures , and the Hyrcani , past whose shores and beyond the river Sideris the Caspian begins to take the name of the ' Hyrcanian ' Sea : on this side of that stream are also the rivers Maxeras and Strato < : all of them take their rise in the Caucasian chain .
Next comes the district of Margiane , so remarkable for its sunny climate .
It is the only spot in all these regions that produces the vine , being shut in on every side by verdant and refreshing hills .
This district is fifteen hundred stadia in circumference , but is rendered remarkably difficult of access by sandy deserts , which extend a distance of one hundred and twenty miles : it lies opposite to the country of Parthia , and in it Alexander founded the city of Alexandria .
This place having been destroyed by the barbarians , Antiochus , the son of Seleucus , rebuilt it on the same site as a Syrian city .
For , seeing that it was watered by the Margus , which passes through it , and is afterwards divided into a number of streams for the irrigation of the district of Zothale , he restored it , but preferred giving it the name of Antiochia .
The circumference of this city is seventy stadia : it was to this place that Orodes conducted such of the Romans as had survived the defeat of Crassus .
From the mountain heights of this district , along the range of Caucasus , the savage race of the Mardi , a free people , extends as far as the Bactri .
Below the district inhabited by them , we find the nations of the Orciani , the Commori , the Berdrigae , the Harmatotropi , the Citomarae , the Comani , the Marucaei , and the Mandruani .
The rivers here are the Mandrus and the Chindrus .
Beyond the nations already mentioned , are the Chorasmii , the Candari , the Attasini , the Paricani , the Sarangae , the Marotiani , the Aorsi , the Gaeli , by the Greek writers called Cadusii , the Matiani , the city of Heraclea , which was founded by Alexander , but was afterwards destroyed , and rebuilt by Antiochus , and by him called Achais ; the Derbices also , through the middle of whose territory the river Oxus runs , after rising in Lake Oxus , the Syrmatae , the Oxydracae , the Heniochi , the Bateni , the Saraparae , and the Bactri , whose chief city is Zariaspe , which afterwards received the name of Bactra , from the river there .
This last nation lies at the back of Mount Paropanisus , over against the sources of the river Indus , and is bounded by the river Ochus .
Beyond it are the Sogdiani , the town of Panda , and , at the very extremity of their territory , Alexandria , founded by Alexander the Great .
At this spot are the altars which were raised by Hercules and Father Liber , as also by Cyrus , Semiramis , and Alexander ; for the expeditions of all these conquerors stopped short at this region , bounded as it is by the river Jaxartes , by the Scythians known as the Silis , and by Alexander and his officers supposed to have been the Tanais .
This river was crossed by Demodamas , a general of kings Seleucus and Antiochus , and whose account more particularly we have here followed .
He also consecrated certain altars here to Apollo Didymaeus .
SOL THE NATIONS OF SCYTHIA AND THE COUNTRIES ON THE EASTERN OCEAN .
Beyond this river are the peoples of Scythia .
The Persians have called them by the general name of Sacae , which properly belongs to only the nearest nation of them .
The more ancient writers give them the name of Aramii .
The Scythians themselves give the name of " Chorsari " to the Persians , and they call Mount Caucasus Graucasis , which means " white with snow .
" The multitude of these Scythian nations is quite innumerable : in their life and habits they much resemble the people of Parthia .
The tribes among them that are better known are the Sacae , the Massagetae , the Dahae , the Essedones , the Ariacae , the Rhymmici , the Paesici , the Amardi , the Histi , the Edones , the Came , the Camacae , the Euchatae , the Cotieri , the Anthusiani , the Psacae , the Arimaspi , the Antacati , the Chroasai , and the Oetei ; among them the Napaei are said to have been destroyed by the Palaei .
The rivers in their country that are the best known , are the Mandragaeus and the Carpasus .
Indeed upon no subject that I know of are there greater discrepancies among writers , from the circumstance , I suppose , of these nations being so extremely numerous , and of such migratory habits .
Alexander the Great has left it stated that the water of this sea is fresh , and M. Varro informs us , that some of it , of a similar character , was brought to Pompey , when holding the chief command in the Mithridatic war in its vicinity ; the salt , no doubt , being overpowered by the volume of water discharged by the rivers which flow into it .
He adds also , that under the direction of Pompey , it was ascertained that it is seven days' journey from India to the river Icarus , in the country of the Bactri , which discharges itself into the Oxus , and that the merchandize of India being conveyed from it through the Caspian Sea into the Cyrus , may be brought by land to Phasis in Pontus , in five days at most .
There are numerous islands throughout the whole of the Caspian sea : the only one that is well known is that of Tazata .
SOL THE SERES : After we have passed the Caspian Sea and the Scythian Ocean , our course takes an easterly direction , such being the turn here taken by the line of the coast .
The first portion of these shores , after we pass the Scythian Promontory , is totally uninhabitable , owing to the snow , and the regions adjoining are uncultivated , in consequence of the savage state of the nations which dwell there .
Here are the abodes of the Scythian Anthropophagi , who feed on human flesh .
Hence it is that all around them consists of vast deserts , inhabited by multitudes of wild beasts , which are continually lying in wait , ready to fall upon human beings just as savage as themselves .
After leaving these , we again come to a nation of the Scythians , and then again to desert tracts tenanted by wild beasts , until we reach a chain of mountains which runs up to the sea , and bears the name of Tabis .
It is not , however , before we have traversed very nearly one half of the coast that looks towards the north-east , that we find it occupied by inhabitants .
SOL The first people that are known of here are the Seres , so famous for the wool that is found in their forests .
After steeping it in water , they comb off a white down that adheres to the leaves ; and then to the females of our part of the world they give the twofold task of unravelling their textures , and of weaving the threads afresh .
So manifold is the labour , and so distant are the regions which are thus ransacked to supply a dress through which our ladies may in public display their charms .
The Seres are of inoffensive manners , but , bearing a strong resemblance therein to all savage nations , they shun all intercourse with the rest of mankind , and await the approach of those who wish to traffic with them .
The first river that is known in their territory is the Psitharas , next to that the Cambari , and the third the Laros ; after which we come to the Promontory of Chryse , the Gulf of Cynaba , the river Atianos , and the nation of the Attacori on the gulf of that name , a people protected by their sunny hills from all noxious blasts , and living in a climate of the same temperature as that of the Hyperborei .
Amometus has written a work entirely devoted to the history of these people , just as Hecataeus has done in his treatise on the Hyperborei .
After the Attacori , we find the nations of the Phruri and the Tochari , and , in the interior , the Casiri , a people of India , who look toward the Scythians , and feed on human flesh .
Here are also numerous wandering Nomad tribes of India .
There are some authors who state that in a north-easterly direction these nations touch upon the Cicones and the Brysari .
SOL THE NATIONS OF INDIA : But we come now to nations as to which there is a more general agreement among writers .
Where the chain of Emodos rises , the nations of India begin , which borders not only on the Eastern sea , but on the Southern as well , which we have already mentioned as being called the Indian Ocean .
That part which faces the east runs in a straight line a distance of eighteen hundred and seventy-five miles until it comes to a bend , at which the Indian Ocean begins .
Here it takes a turn to the south , and continues to run in that direction a distance of two thousand four hundred and seventy-five miles , according to Eratosthenes , as far as the river Indus , the boundary of India on the west .
Many authors have represented the entire length of the Indian coast as being forty days' and nights' sail , and as being , from north to south , two thousand eight hundred and fifty miles .
Agrippa states its length to be three thousand three hundred miles , and its breadth , two thousand three hundred .
Posidonius has given its measurement as lying from north-east to south-east , placing it opposite to Gaul , of which country he has given the measurement as lying from north-west to south-west ; making the whole of India to lie due west of Gaul .
Hence , as he has shewn by undoubted proofs , India lying opposite to Gaul must be refreshed by the blowing of that wind , and derive its salubrity therefrom .
SOL In this region , the appearance of the heavens is totally changed , and quite different is the rising of the stars ; there are two summers in the year , and two harvests , while the winter intervenes between them during the time that the Etesian winds are blowing : during our winter too , they enjoy light breezes , and their seas are navigable .
In this country there are nations and cities which would be found to be quite innumerable , if a person should attempt to enumerate them .
For it has been explored not only by the arms of Alexander the Great and of the kings who succeeded him , by Seleucus and Antiochus , who sailed round even to the Caspian and Hyrcanian Sea , and by Patrocles , the admiral of their fleet , but has been treated of by several other Greek writers who resided at the courts of Indian kings , such , for instance , as Megasthenes , and by Dionysius , who was sent thither by Philadelphus , expressly for the purpose : all of whom have enlarged upon the power and vast resources of these nations .
Still , however , there is no possibility of being rigorously exact , so different are the accounts given , and often of a nature so incredible .
The followers of Alexander the Great have stated in their writings , that there were no less than five thousand cities in that portion of India which they vanquished by force of arms , not one of which was smaller than that of Cos ; that its nations were eight in number , that India forms one-third of the whole earth , and that its populations are innumerable — a thing which is certainly far from improbable , seeing that the Indians are nearly the only race of people who have never migrated from their own territories .
From the time of Father Liber to that of Alexander the Great , one hundred and fifty-three kings of India are reckoned , extending over a period of six thousand four hundred and fifty-one years and three months .
The vast extent of their rivers is quite marvellous ; it is stated that on no one day did Alexander the Great sail less than six hundred stadia on the Indus , and still was unable to reach its mouth in less than five months and some few days : and yet it is a well-known fact that this river is not so large as the Ganges .
Seneca , one of our fellow-countrymen , who has written a treatise upon the subject of India , has given its rivers as sixty-five in number , and its nations as one hundred and eighteen .
The difficulty too would be quite as great , if we were to attempt to enumerate its mountains .
The chains of Emaus , of Emodos , of Paropanisus , and of Caucasus , are all connected , the one with the other ; and from their foot , the country of India runs down in the form of a vast plain , bearing a very considerable resemblance to that of Egypt .
SOL However , that we may come to a better understanding relative to the description of these regions , we will follow in the track of Alexander the Great .
Diognetus and Baeton , whose duty it was to ascertain the distances and length of his expeditions , have written that from the Caspian Gates to Hecatompylon , the city of the Parthians , the distance is the number of miles which we have already stated ; and that from thence to Alexandria , of the Arii , which city was founded by the same king , the distance is five hundred and seventy-five miles ; from thence to Prophthasia , the city of the Drangae , one hundred and ninety-nine ; from thence to the city of the Arachosii , five hundred and sixty-five ; from thence to Ortospanum , one hundred and seventy-five ; and from thence to the city built by Alexander , fifty , miles .
In some copies , however , the numbers are found differently stated ; and we find this last city even placed at the very foot of Mount Caucasus !
From this place to the river Cophes and Peucolaitis , a city of India , is two hundred and thirty-seven miles ; from thence to the river Indus and the city of Taxilla sixty ; from thence to the famous river Hydaspes one hundred and twenty ; and from thence to the Hypasis , a river no less famous , two hundred and ninety miles , and three hundred and ninety paces .
This last was the extreme limit of the expedition of Alexander , though he crossed the river and dedicated certain altars on the opposite side .
The dispatches written by order of that king fully agree with the distances above stated .
SOL The remaining distances beyond the above point were ascertained on the expedition of Seleucus Nicator .
They are , to the river Sydrus , one hundred and sixty-eight miles ; to the river Jomanes , the same ; some copies , however , add to this last distance five miles ; thence to the Ganges , one hundred and twelve miles ; to Rhodapha , five hundred and sixty-nine — though , according to some writers , this last distance is only three hundred and twenty-five miles ; to the town of Calinipaxa , one hundred and sixty-seven , according to some , two hundred and sixty-five ; thence to the confluence of the river Jomanes and Ganges , six hundred and twenty-five ; most writers , however , add thirteen miles to this last distance ; thence to the city of Palibothra , four hundred and twenty-five — and thence to the mouth of the Ganges , six hundred and thirty-seven miles and a half .
SOL The nations whom it may be not altogether inopportune to mention , after passing the Emodian Mountains , a cross range of which is called " Imaus ," a word which , in the language of the natives , signifies " snowy ," are the Isari , the Cosyri , the Izi , and , upon the chain of mountains , the Chisiotosagi , with numerous peoples , which have the surname of Brachmanae , among whom are the Maccocalingae .
There are also the rivers Prinas and Cainas , which last flows into the Ganges , both of them navigable streams .
The nation of the Calingae comes nearest to the sea , and above them are the Mandei and the Malli .
In the territory of the last-named people is a mountain called Mallus : the boundary of this region is the river Ganges .
SOL THE GANGES : Some writers have stated that this river , like the Nile , takes its rise from unknown sources , and , in a similar manner , waters the neighbouring territory ; others , again , say that it rises in the mountains of Scythia .
They state also that nineteen rivers discharge their waters into it ; those among them that are navigable , besides the rivers already mentioned , are the Condochates , the Erannoboas , the Cosoagus , and the Sonus .
Other writers again say that it bursts forth at its very source with a loud noise , hurling itself over rocks and precipices ; and that after it has reached the plains , its waters become more tranquil , and it pauses for a time in a certain lake , after which it flows gently on .
They say also that it is eight miles in breadth , where it is the very narrowest , and one hundred stadia where it is but moderately wide , and that it is nowhere less than twenty paces in depth .
The last nation situate on the banks of the Ganges is that of the Gangarides Calingae ; the city where their king dwells has the name of Protalis .
This king has sixty thousand foot-soldiers , one thousand horse , and seven hundred elephants , always caparisoned ready for battle .
The people of the more civilized nations of India are divided into several classes .
One of these classes tills the earth , another attends to military affairs , others again are occupied in mercantile pursuits , while the wisest and the most wealthy among them have the management of the affairs of state — act as judges , and give counsel to the king .
The fifth class , entirely devoting themselves to the pursuit of wisdom , which in these countries is almost held in the same veneration as religion , always end their life by a voluntary death upon the lighted pile .
In addition to these , there is a class in a half-savage state , and doomed to endless labour ; by means of their exertions , all the classes previously mentioned are supported .
It is their duty to hunt the elephant , and to tame him when captured ; for it is by the aid of these animals that they plough ; by these animals they are conveyed from place to place ; these in especial they look upon as constituting their flocks and herds ; by their aid they wage their wars , and fight in defence of their territories .
Strength , age , and size , are the points usually considered in making choice of these animals .
SOL In the Ganges there is an island of very considerable size , inhabited by a single nation ; it is called Modogalinga .
Beyond the Ganges are situate the Modubae , the Molindae , the Uberae , with a magnificent city of the same name , the Modresi , the Preti , the Caloae , the Sasuri , the Passalae , the Colobae , the Orumcolae , the Abali , and the Thalutae .
The king of the last-named people has fifty thousand foot-soldiers , four thousand horse , and four hundred armed elephants .
We next come to a still more powerful nation , the Andarae , who dwell in numerous villages , as well as thirty cities fortified with walls and towers .
They furnish for their king one hundred thousand foot , two thousand horse , and a thousand elephants .
The country of the Dardae is the most productive of gold , that of the Setae of silver .
SOL But more famous and more powerful than any nation , not only in these regions , but throughout almost the whole of India , are the Prasii , who dwell in a city of vast extent and of remarkable opulence , called Palibothra ; from which circumstance some writers have given to the people themselves the name of Palibothri , and , indeed , to the whole tract of country between the Ganges and the Indus .
These people keep on daily pay in their king 's service an army , consisting of six hundred thousand foot , thirty thousand horse , and nine thousand elephants , from which we may easily form a conjecture as to the vast extent of their resources .
Behind these people , and lying still more in the interior , are the Monedes , and the Suari , among whom is a mountain known as Maleus , upon which the shadow falls to the north in winter , and to the south in summer , six months alternately .
In this district the Constellation of the Greater Bear is seen at only one period in the year , and then but for fifteen days , according to what Baeton states .
Megasthenes , however , informs us that the same is the case also in many other localities of India .
The South Pole is by the Indians called Diamasa .
SOL The river Jomanes runs into the Ganges through the territory of the Palibothri , between the cities of Methora and Chrysobora .
In the regions which lie to the south of the Ganges , the people are tinted by the heat of the sun , so much so as to be quite coloured , but yet not burnt black , like the Aethiopians .
The nearer they approach the Indus , the deeper their colour , a proof of the heat of the climate .
After leaving the nation of the Prasii , we immediately come to the Indus ; in the mountains of the Prasii a race of Pygmies is said to exist .
Artemidorus says that between these two rivers there is a distance of two thousand one hundred miles .
SOL THE INDUS : The Indus , called Sindis by the natives , rises in that branch of the Caucasian range which bears the name of Paropanisus , and runs in an easterly direction , receiving in its course the waters of nineteen rivers .
The most famous of these are the Hydaspes , into which four other rivers have already discharged themselves , the Cantaba , which receives three other rivers , the Acesinus , and the Hypasis , which last two are navigable themselves .
Still however , so moderate , as it were , do the waters of this river show themselves in their course , that it is never more than fifty stadia in width , nor does it ever exceed fifteen paces in depth .
Of two islands , which it forms in its course , the one , which is known as Prasiane , is of very considerable size ; the other , which is smaller , is called Patale .
According to the accounts given by the most moderate writers , this river is navigable for a distance of twelve hundred and fifty miles , and after following the sun 's course to the west , in some degree , discharges itself into the ocean .
I will here give the distances of various places situate on the coast to the mouth of this river , in a general way , just as I find them stated , although they none of them tally with each other .
SOL From the mouth of the Ganges to the Promontory of the Calingi and the town of Dandaguda , is six hundred and twenty-five miles ; from thence to Tropina twelve hundred and twenty-five ; from thence to the promontory of Perimula , where is held the most celebrated mart in all India , seven hundred and fifty , and from thence to the city of Patala , in the island just mentioned , six hundred and twenty miles .
SOL The mountain races between the Indus and the Jomanes are the Cesi , the Cetriboni , who dwell in the woods , and after them the Megallae , whose king possesses five hundred elephants , and an army of horse and foot , the numbers of which are unknown ; then the Chrysei , the Parasangae , and the Asmagi , whose territory is infested by wild tigers ; these people keep in arms thirty thousand foot , three hundred elephants , and eight hundred horse .
They are bounded by the river Indus , and encircled by a range of mountains and deserts for a distance of six hundred and twenty-five miles .
Below these deserts are the Dari and the Surve , and then deserts again for one hundred and eighty-seven miles , sands in general encircling these spots just as islands are surrounded by the sea .
Below these deserts , again , are the Maltecorae , the Singae , the Marohae , the Rarungae , and the Morontes .
These last peoples , who possess the mountains throughout the whole range of country as far as the shores of the ocean , are free , and independent of all kings , and hold numerous cities upon the declivities of the mountains .
After them come the Nareae , who are bounded by Capitalia , the most lofty of all the Indian peaks : the inhabitants who dwell on the other side of it have extensive mines of gold and silver .
After these again are the Oratae , whose king possesses only ten elephants , but a large army of foot ; next come the Suarataratae , who live under the rule of a king as well , but breed no elephants , as they depend solely on their horse and foot ; then the Odonbeores , the Arabastree , and the Horacae , which last inhabit a fine city fortified by trenches cut in the marshes .
It is quite impossible to approach the city , except by the bridge , as the water in the trenches is full of crocodiles , an animal most insatiate for human flesh .
There is another city also in their territory , which has been greatly extolled , Automula by name , situate on the sea-shore , a famous mart , lying at the point of confluence of five rivers : their king possesses sixteen hundred elephants , one hundred and fifty thousand foot , and five thousand horse .
The king of the Charmae is a less opulent potentate ; he has only sixty elephants and some small remains of his former strength .
After these we come to the nation of the Pandae , the only one throughout all India which is ruled by women .
It is said that Hercules had but one child of the female sex , for which reason she was his especial favourite , and he bestowed upon her the principal one of these kingdoms .
The sovereigns who derive their origin from this female , rule over three hundred towns , and have an army of one hundred and fifty thousand foot , and five hundred elephants .
After passing through this list of three hundred cities , we come to the Darangae , the Posingae , the Butae , the Gogaraei , the Umbrae , the Nereae , the Brancosi , the Nobundae , the Cocondae , the Nesei , the Palatitae , the Salobriasae , and the Olostrae , who reach up to the island of Patala , from the extremity of whose shores to the Caspian Gates it is a distance of nineteen hundred and twenty-five miles .
SOL After passing this island , the other side of the Indus is occupied , as we know by clear and undoubted proofs , by the Athoae , the Bolingae , the Gallitalutae , the Dimuri , the Megari , the Ardabae , the Mesae , and after them , the Uri and the Silae ; beyond which last there are desert tracts , extending a distance of two hundred and fifty miles .
After passing these nations , we come to the Organagae , the Abortae , the Bassuertae , and , after these last , deserts similar to those previously ' mentioned .
We then come to the peoples of the Sorofages , the Arbae , the Marogomatrae , the Umbrittae , of whom there are twelve nations , each with two cities , and the Asini , a people who dwell in three cities , their capital being Bucephala , which was founded around the tomb of the horse belonging to king Alexander , which bore that name .
Above these peoples there are some mountain tribes , which lie at the foot of Caucasus , the Soseadae and the Sondrae , and , after passing the Indus and going down its stream , the Samarabriae , the Sambraceni , the Bisambritae , the Orsi , the Anixeni , and the Taxilae , with a famous city , which lies on a low but level plain , the general name of the district being Amenda : there are four nations here , the Peucolaitae , the Arsagalitae , the Geretae , and the Assoi .
SOL The greater part of the geographers , in fact , do not look upon India as bounded by the river Indus , but add to it the four Satrapies of the Gedrosi , the Arachotae , the Arii , and the Paropanisidae , the river Cophes thus forming the extreme boundary of India .
All these territories , however , according to other writers , are reckoned as belonging to the country of the Arii .
Many writers , too , place in India the city of Nysa , and the mountain of Merus , sacred to Father Bacchus ; in which circumstance originated the story that he sprang from the thigh of Jupiter .
They also place here the nation of the Astacani , whose country abounds in the vine , the laurel , the box-tree , and all the fruits which are produced in Greece .
As to those wonderful and almost fabulous stories which are related about the fertility of the soil , and the various kinds of fruits and trees , as well as wild beasts , and birds , and other sorts of animals , they shall be mentioned each in its proper place , in a future portion of this work .
I shall also very shortly have to make some further mention of the four Satrapies , it being at present my wish to hasten to a description of the island of Taprobane .
SOL But first there are some other islands of which we must make mention .
Patala , as we have already stated , lies at the mouth of the Indus : it is of a triangular figure , and is two hundred and twenty miles in breadth .
Beyond the mouth of the Indus are the islands of Chryse and Argyre , abounding in metals , I believe ; but as to what some persons have stated , that their soil consists of gold and silver , I am not so willing to give a ready credence to that .
After passing these islands we come to Crocala , twenty miles in breadth , and then , at twelve miles' distance from it , Bibraga , abounding in oysters and other bell-fish .
At eight miles' distance from Bibraga we find Toralliba , and many others of no note .
SOL TAPROBANE : Taprobane , under the name of the " land of the Antichthones ," was long looked upon as another world : the age and the arms of Alexander the Great were the first to give satisfactory proof that it is an island .
Onesicritus , the commander of his fleet , has informed us that the elephants of this island are larger , and better adapted for warfare than those of India ; and from Megasthenes we learn that it is divided by a river , that the inhabitants have the name of Paleogoni , and that their country is more productive of gold and pearls of great size than even India .
Eratosthenes has also given the dimensions of this island , as being seven thousand stadia in length , and five thousand in breadth : he states also that there are no cities , but villages to the number of seven hundred .
It begins at the Eastern sea , and lies extended opposite to India , east and west .
This island was in former times supposed to be twenty days' sail from the country of the Prasii , but in later times , whereas the navigation was formerly confined to vessels constructed of papyrus with the tackle peculiar to the Nile , the distance has been estimated at no more than seven days' sail , in reference to the speed which can be attained by vessels of our construction .
The sea that lies between the island and the mainland is full of shallows , not more than six paces in depth ; but in certain channels it is of such extraordinary depth , that no anchor has ever found a bottom .
For this reason it is that the vessels are constructed with prows at either end ; so that there may be no necessity for tacking while navigating these channels , which are extremely narrow .
The tonnage of these vessels is three thousand amphorae .
In traversing their seas , the people of Taprobane take no observations of the stars , and indeed the Greater Bear is not visible to them ; but they carry birds out to sea , which they let go from time to time , and so follow their course as they make for the land .
They devote only four months in the year to the pursuits of navigation , and are particularly careful not to trust themselves on the sea during the next hundred days after our summer solstice , for in those seas it is at that time the middle of winter .
SOL Thus much we learn from the ancient writers ; it has fallen to our lot , however , to obtain a still more accurate knowledge of these people ; for during the reign of the Emperor Claudius , an embassy came from even this distant island to Rome .
The circumstances under which this took place were as follow : Annius Plocamus had farmed from the treasury the revenues arising from the Red Sea .
A certain freedman of his , while sailing around Arabia , was carried away by a gale from the north beyond the coast of Carmania .
In the course of fifteen days he had drifted to Hippuros , a port of Taprobane , where he was most kindly and hospitably received by the king ; and having , after a study of six months , become well acquainted with the language , was enabled to answer all his enquiries relative to the Romans and their emperor .
But of all that he heard , the king was more particularly struck with surprise at our rigid notions of justice , on ascertaining that among the money found on the captive , the denarii were all of equal weight , although the different figures on them plainly showed that they had been struck in the reigns of several emperors .
By this circumstance in especial , the king was prompted to form an alliance with the Romans , and accordingly sent to Rome an embassy , consisting of four persons , the chief of whom was Itachias .
SOL From these persons we learned that in Taprobane there are five hundred towns , and that there is a harbour that lies facing the south , and adjoining the city of Palaesimundus , the most famous city in the isle , the king 's place of residence , and containing a population of two hundred thousand .
They also informed us that in the interior there is a lake called Megisba , three hundred and seventy-five miles in circumference , and containing islands which are fertile , though for pasturage only .
In this lake they informed us two rivers take their rise , one of which , called Palesimundus , flows into the harbour near the city of that name , by three channels , the narrowest of which is five stadia in width , the largest fifteen ; while the other , Cydara by name , takes a direction northward , towards the Indian coast .
We learned also that the nearest point of the Indian coast is a promontory known as Coliacum , distant from the island four days' sail , and that midway between them lies the island of the Sun .
They stated also that those seas are of a deep green tint ; besides which , there are numerous trees growing at the bottom , so much so , that the rudders of the vessels frequently break off portions of their foliage .
They were much astonished at the constellations which are visible to us , the Greater Bear and the Pleiades , as though they had now beheld a new expanse of the heavens ; and they declared that in their country the moon can only be seen above the horizon from the eighth to its sixteenth day .
They also stated that Canopus , a large bright star , gives light to them by night .
But what surprised them more than anything , was that the shadow of their bodies was thrown towards our hemisphere and not theirs , and that the sun arose on the left hand and set on the right , and not in the opposite direction .
They also informed us that the side of their island which lies opposite to India is ten thousand stadia in length , and runs in a south-easterly direction — that beyond the Emodian Mountains they look towards the Serve , whose acquaintance they had also made in the pursuits of commerce ; that the father of Rachias had frequently visited their country , and that the Serae always came to meet them on their arrival .
These people , they said , exceeded the ordinary human height , had flaxen hair , and blue eyes , and made an uncouth sort of noise by way of talking , having no language of their own for the purpose of communicating their thoughts .
The rest of their information was of a similar nature to that communicated by our merchants .
It was to the effect that the merchandize on sale was left by them upon the opposite bank of a river on their coast , and it was then removed by the natives , if they thought proper to deal on terms of exchange .
On no grounds ought luxury with greater reason to be detested by us , than if we only transport our thoughts to these scenes , and then reflect , what are its demands , to what distant spots it sends in order to satisfy them , and for how mean and how unworthy an end !
SOL But yet Taprobane even , isolated as it is by nature from the rest of the world , is not exempt from our vices .
Gold and silver are held in esteem even there .
They have a marble which resembles tortoise-shell in appearance ; this , as well as their pearls and precious stones , is highly valued ; all our luxuries in fact , those even of the most exquisite nature , are there carried to the very highest pitch .
They asserted that their wealth is much greater than ours , but admitted that we know better than they how to obtain real enjoyment from opulence .
SOL In this island no slavery exists ; they do not prolong their sleep today-break , nor indeed during any part of the day ; their buildings are only of a moderate height from the ground ; the price of corn is always the same ; they have no courts of law and no litigation .
Hercules is the deity whom they worship ; SABTUL and their king is chosen by the people , an aged man always , distinguished for his mild and clement disposition , and without children .
If after he has been elected king , he happens to become the father of children , his abdication is the consequence ; this is done that there may be no danger of the sovereign power becoming hereditary .
Thirty advisers are provided for him by the people , and it is only by the advice of the majority of them that any man is condemned to capital punishment .
Even then , the person so condemned has a right of appealing to the people , in which case a jury consisting of seventy persons is appointed .
Should these acquit the accused , the thirty counsellors are no longer held in any estimation , but are visited with the greatest disgrace .
The king wears the costume of Father Liber , while the rest of the people dress like the natives of Arabia .
The king , if he is found guilty of any offence , is condemned to death ; but no one slays him ; all turn their backs upon him , and refuse to hold any communication or even discourse with him .
Their festivals are celebrated with the chase , the most valued sports being the pursuit of the tiger and the elephant .
The lands are carefully tilled ; the vine is not cultivated there , but of other fruits there is great abundance .
They take great delight in fishing , and especially in catching turtles ; beneath the shells of which whole families find an abode , of such vast size are they to be found .
These people look upon a hundred years as a comparatively short life .
Thus much have we learned respecting Taprobane .
SOL THE ARIANI AND THE ADJOINING NATIONS : We will now proceed to give some further particulars relative to the four Satrapies , of which we have postponed further mention till the present occasion .
SOL After passing the nations in the vicinity of the Indus , we come to the mountain districts .
The territory of Capisene formerly had a city , called Capisa , which was destroyed by Cyrus .
Arachosia has a river and a city of the same name ; the city was built by Semiramis ; by some writers it is called Cophen .
The river Erymanthus flows past Parabeste , which belongs to the Arachosii .
Writers make the Dexendrusi come next , forming the boundary of the Arachotae on the southern side , and of the Paropanisadae on the north .
The city of Cartana lies at the foot of Caucasus ; in later times it has been called Tetragonis .
This region lies over against that of the Bactri , who come next , and whose chief city is Alexandria , so called from the name of its founder .
We then come to the Syndraci , the Dangalae the Parapinae , the Catuces , and the Mazi ; and then at the foot of Caucasus , to the Cadrusi , whose town was built by Alexander .
SOL Below all these countries , is the line of coast which we come to after leaving the Indus .
Ariana is a region parched by the sun and surrounded by deserts ; still , however , as the face of the country is every here and there diversified with well-shaded spots , it finds communities grouped together to cultivate it , and more especially around the two rivers , known as the Tonberos and the Arosapes .
There is also the town of Artacoana , and the river Arius , which flows past Alexandria , a city founded by Alexander ; this place is thirty stadia in extent .
Much more beautiful than it , as well as of much greater antiquity , is Artacabane , fortified a second time by Antiochus , and fifty stadia in breadth .
We then come to the nation of the Dorisdorsigi , and the rivers Pharnaracotis , and Ophradus ; and then to Prophthasia , a city of the Zaraspades , the Drangae , the Evergetae , the Zarangae , and the Gedrusi ; the towns of Pucolis , Lyphorta , the desert of the Methorgi , the river Manais , the nation of the Acutri , the river Eorum , the nation of the Orbi , the Pomanus , a navigable river in the territories of the Pandares , the Apirus in the country of the Suari , with a good harbour at its mouth , the city of Condigramma , and the river Cophes ; into which last flow the navigable streams of the Saddaros , the Parospus , and the Sodanus .
Some writers will also have it that Daritis forms part of Ariana , and give the length of them both as nineteen hundred and fifty miles , and the breadth one half of that of India .
Others again have spread the Gedrusi and the Pasires over an extent of one hundred and thirty-eight miles , and place next to them the Ichthyophagi Oritae , a people who speak a language peculiar to themselves , and not the Indian dialect , extending over a space of two hundred miles .
Alexander forbade the whole of the Ichthyophagi to live any longer on fish .
Next after these the writers have placed extensive deserts , and then Carmania , Persia , and Arabia .
SOL VOYAGES TO INDIA : But before we enter into any details respecting these countries , it will be as well to mention what Onesicritus has stated , who commanded the fleet of Alexander , and sailed from India into the heart of Persia , and what has been more recently related by Juba ; after which I shall speak of the route along these seas which has been discovered in later years , and is followed at the present day .
The journal of the voyage of Onesicritus and Nearchus has neither the names of the stations , nor yet the distances set down in it ; and first of all , it is not sufficiently explained where Xylenepolis was , and near what river , a place founded by Alexander , and from which , upon setting out , they took their departure .
Still , however , the following places are mentioned by them , which are worthy of our notice .
The town of Arbis , founded by Nearchus on the occasion of this voyage ; the river Nabrus , navigable for vessels , and opposite to it an island , at a distance of seventy stadia ; Alexandria , built by Leonnatus by order of Alexander in the territories of this people ; Argenus , with a very convenient harbour ; the river Tonberos , a navigable stream , around whose banks are the Pasirae ; then come the Ichthyophagi , who extend over so large a tract of coast that it took thirty days to sail past their territory ; and an island known by the names of the " Island of the Sun " and the " Bed of the Nymphs ," the earth of which is red , and in which every animal instantly dies ; the cause of which , however , has not been ascertained .
Next to these is the nation of the Ori , and then the Hyctanis , a river of Carmania , with an excellent harbour at its mouth , and producing gold ; at this spot the writers state that for the first time they caught sight of the Great Bear .
The star Arcturus too , they tell us , was not to be seen here every night , and never , when it was seen , during the whole of it .
Up to this spot extended the empire of the Achaemenidae , and in these districts are to be found mines of copper , iron , arsenic , and red lead .
SOL They next came to the Promontory of Carmania , from which the distance across to the opposite coast , where the Macae , a nation of Arabia , dwell , is fifty miles ; and then to three islands , of which that of Oracla is alone inhabited , being the only one supplied with fresh water ; it is distant from the mainland twenty-five miles ; quite in the Gulf , and facing Persia , there are four other islands .
About these islands sea-serpents were seen swimming towards them , twenty cubits in length , which struck the fleet with great alarm .
They then came to the island of Athothradus , and those called the Gauratae , upon which dwells the nation of the Gyani ; the river Hyperis , which discharges itself midway into the Persian Gulf , and is navigable for merchant ships ; the river Sitiogagus , from which to Pasargadae is seven days' sail ; a navigable river known as the Phristimus , and an island without a name ; and then the river Granis , navigable for vessels of small burden , and flowing through Susiane ; the Deximontani , a people who manufacture bitumen , dwell on its right bank .
The river Zarotis comes next , difficult of entrance at its mouth , except by those who are well acquainted with it ; and then two small islands ; after which the fleet sailed through shallows which looked very much like a marsh , but were rendered navigable by certain channels which had been cut there .
They then arrived at the mouth of the Euphrates , and from thence passed into a lake which is formed by the rivers Eulaeus and Tigris , in the vicinity of Charax , after which they arrived at Susa , on the river Tigris .
Here , after a voyage of three months , they found Alexander celebrating a festival , seven months after he had left them at Patale .
Such was the voyage performed by the fleet of Alexander .
SOL In later times it has been considered a well-ascertained fact that the voyage from Syagrus , the Promontory of Arabia , to Patale , reckoned at thirteen hundred and thirty-five miles , can be performed most advantageously with the aid of a westerly wind , which is there known by the name of Hippalus .
SOL The age that followed pointed out a shorter route , and a safer one , to those who might happen to sail from the same promontory for Sigerus , a port of India ; and for a long time this route was followed , until at last a still shorter cut was discovered by a merchant , and the thirst for gain brought India even still nearer to us .
At the present day voyages are made to India every year : and companies of archers are carried on board the vessels , as those seas are greatly infested with pirates .
SOL It will not be amiss too , on the present occasion , to set forth the whole of the route from Egypt , which has been stated to us of late , upon information on which reliance may be placed , and is here published for the first time .
The subject is one well worthy of our notice , seeing that in no year does India drain our empire of less than five hundred and fifty millions of sesterces , giving back her own wares in exchange , which are sold among us at fully one hundred times their prime cost .
SOL Two miles distant from Alexandria is the town of Juliopolis .
The distance thence to Coptos , up the Nile , is three hundred and eight miles ; the voyage is performed , when the Etesian winds are blowing , in twelve days .
From Coptos the journey is made with the aid of camels , stations being arranged at intervals for the supply of fresh water .
The first of these stations is called Hydreuma , and is distant twenty-two miles ; the second is situate on a mountain , at a distance of one day 's journey from the last ; the third is at a second Hydreuma , distant from Coptos ninety-five miles ; the fourth is on a mountain ; the next to that is at another Hydreuma , that of Apollo , and is distant from Coptos one hundred and eighty-four miles ; after which , there is another on a mountain .
There is then another station at a place called the New Hydreuma , distant from Coptos two hundred and thirty miles : and next to it there is another , called the Old Hydreuma , or the Troglodytic , where a detachment is always on guard , with a caravansary that affords lodging for two thousand persons .
This last is distant from the New Hydreuma seven miles .
After leaving it we come to the city of Berenice , situate upon a harbour of the Red Sea , and distant from Coptos two hundred and fifty-seven miles .
The greater part of this distance is generally travelled by night , on account of the extreme heat , the day being spent at the stations ; in consequence of which it takes twelve days to perform the whole journey from Coptos to Berenice .
SOL Passengers generally set sail at midsummer , before the rising of the Dog-star , or else immediately after , and in about thirty days arrive at Ocelis in Arabia , or else at Cane , in the region which bears frankincense .
There is also a third port of Arabia , Muza by name ; it is not , however , used by persons on their passage to India , as only those touch at it who deal in incense and the perfumes of Arabia .
More in the interior there is a city ; the residence of the king there is called Sapphar , and there is another city known by the name of Save .
To those who are bound for India , Ocelis is the best place for embarcation .
If the wind , called Hippalus , happens to be blowing , it is possible to arrive in forty days at the nearest mart of India , Muziris by name .
This , however , is not a very desirable place for disembarcation , on account of the pirates which frequent its vicinity , where they occupy a place called Nitrias ; nor , in fact , is it very rich in articles of merchandize .
Besides , the road-stead for shipping is a considerable distance from the shore , and the cargoes have to be conveyed in boats , either for loading or discharging .
At the moment that I am writing these pages , the name of the king of this place is Caelobothras .
Another port , and a much more convenient one , is that which lies in the territory of the people called Neacyndi , Barace by name .
Here king Pandion used to reign , dwelling at a considerable distance from the mart in the interior , at a city known as Modiera .
The district from which pepper is carried down to Barace in boats hollowed out of a single tree , is known as Cottonara .
nan of these names of nations , ports , and cities are to be found in any of the former writers , from which circumstance it would appear that the localities have since changed their names .
Travellers set sail from India on their return to Europe , at the beginning of the Egyptian month Tybis , which is our December , or at all events before the sixth day of the Egyptian month Mechir , the same as our ides of January : if they do this , they can go and return in the same year .
They set sail from India with a south-east wind , and upon entering the Red Sea , catch the south-west or south .
We will now return to our main subject .
SOL CARMANIA : Nearchus states in his writings that the coast of Carmania extends a distance of twelve hundred and fifty miles .
From its frontier to the river Sabis is one hundred miles .
At this spot begins the cultivation of the vine ; which with the tillage of the fields , extends as far as the river Ananis , a distance of twenty-five miles .
This region is known by the name of Armuzia .
The cities of Carmania are Zetis and Alexandria .
SOL THE PERSIAN AND THE ARABIAN GULFS : The sea then makes a two-fold indentations in the land upon these coasts , under the name of Rubrum or " Red ," given to it by our countrymen ; while the Greeks have called it Erythrum , from king Erythras , or , according to some writers , from its red colour , which they think is produced by the reflection of the sun 's rays ; others again are of opinion that it arises from the sand and the complexion of the soil , others from some peculiarity in the nature of the water .
Be this as it may , this body of water is divided into two gulfs .
The one which lies to the east is called the Persian Gulf , and is two thousand five hundred miles in circumference , according to Eratosthenes .
Opposite to it lies Arabia , the length of which is fifteen hundred miles .
On the other side again , Arabia is bounded by the Arabian Gulf .
The sea as it enters this gulf is called the Azanian Sea .
The Persian Gulf , at the entrance , is only five miles wide ; some writers make it four .
From the entrance to the very bottom of the gulf , in a straight line , has been ascertained to be nearly eleven hundred and twenty-five miles : in outline it strongly resembles the human head .
Onesicritus and Nearchus have stated in their works that from the river Indus to the Persian Gulf , and from thence to Babylon , situate in the marshes of the Euphrates , is a distance of seventeen hundred miles .
SOL In the angle of Carmania are the Chelonophagi , who cover their cabins with the shells of turtles , and live upon their flesh ; these people inhabit the next promontory that is seen after leaving the river Arbis ; with the exception of the head , they are covered all over with long hair , and are clothed in the skins of fishes .
SOL Beyond their district , in the direction of India , is said to be the desert island of Caicandrus , fifty miles out at sea ; near to which , with a strait flowing between them , is Stoidis , celebrated for its valuable pearls .
After passing the promontory are the Armozei , joining up to the Carmani ; some writers , however , place between them the Arbii , extending along the shore a distance of four hundred and twenty-one miles .
Here is a place called Portus Macedonum , and the Altars of Alexander , situate on a promontory , besides the rivers Saganos , Daras , and Salsa .
Beyond the last river we come to the promontory of Themisteas , and the island of Aphrodisias , which is peopled .
Here Persis begins , at the river Oratis , which separates it from Elymais .
Opposite to the coast of Persis , are the islands of Psilos , Cassandra , and Aracia , the last sacred to Neptune , and containing a mountain of great height .
Persis itself , looking towards the west , has a line of coast five hundred and fifty miles in length ; it is a country opulent even to luxury , but has long since changed its name for that of " Parthia .
" I shall now devote a few words to the Parthian empire .
SOL THE PARTHIAN EMPIRE : The kingdoms of Parthia are eighteen in all : such being the divisions of its provinces , which lie , as we have already stated , along the Red Sea to the south , and the Hyrcanian to the north .
Of this number the eleven , called the Higher provinces , begin at the frontiers of Armenia and the shores of the Caspian , and extend to the Scythians , whose mode of life is similar in every respect .
The other seven kingdoms of Parthia bear the name of the Lower provinces .
As to the Parthi themselves , Parthia always lay at the foot of the mountains so often mentioned , which overhang all these nations .
On the east it is bounded by the Arii , on the south by Carmania and the Ariani , on the west by the Pratitae , a people of the Medi , and on the north by the Hyrcani : it is surrounded by deserts on every side .
The more distant of the Parthi are called Nomades ; on this side of them there are deserts .
On the west are the cities of Issatis and Calliope , already mentioned , on the north-east Europus , on the south-east Maria ; in the middle there are Hecatompylos , Arsace , and Nisiaea , a fine district of Parthiene , in which is Alexandropolis , so called from its founder .
It is requisite in this place to trace the localities of the Medi also , and to describe in succession the features of the country as far as the Persian Sea , in order that the account which follows may be the better understood .
Media lies crosswise to the west , and so presenting itself obliquely to Parthia , closes the entrance of both kingdoms into which it is divided .
It has , then , on the east , the Caspii and the Parthi ; on the south , Sittacene , Susiane , and Persis ; on the west , Adsiabene ; and on the north , Armenia .
The Persae have always inhabited the shores of the Red Sea , for which reason it has received the name of the Persian Gulf .
This maritime region of Persis has the name of Ciribo ; on the side on which it runs up to that of the Medi , there is a place known by the name of Climax Megale , where the mountains are ascended by a steep flight of stairs , and so afford a narrow passage which leads to Persepolis , the former capital of the kingdom , destroyed by Alexander .
It has also , at its extreme frontier , Laodicea , founded by Antiochus .
To the east of this place is the fortress of Passagarda , held by the Magi , at which spot is the tomb of Cyrus ; also Ecbatana , a city of theirs , the inhabitants of which were removed by Darius to the mountains .
Between the Parthi and the Ariani projects the territory of the Paraetaceni .
By these nations and the river Euphrates are the Lower kingdoms of Parthia bounded ; of the others we shall speak after Mesopotamia , which we shall now describe , with the exception of that angle of it and the peoples of Arabia , which have been already mentioned in a former book .
SOL MESOPOTAMIA : The whole of Mesopotamia formerly belonged to the Assyrians , being covered with nothing but villages , with the exception of Babylonia and Ninus .
The Macedonians formed these communities into cities , being prompted thereto by the extraordinary fertility of the soil .
Besides the cities already mentioned , it contains those of Seleucia , Laodicea , Artemita ; and in Arabia , the peoples known as the Orei and the Mardani , besides Antiochia , founded by Nicanor , the governor of Mesopotamia , and called Arabis .
Joining up to these in the interior is an Arabian people , called the Eldamani , and above them , upon the river Pallaconta , the town of Bura , and the Arabian peoples known as the Salmani and the Masei .
Up to the Gordyaei join the Aloni , through whose territory runs the river Zerbis , which falls into the Tigris ; next are the Azones , the Silici , a mountain tribe , and the Orontes , to the west of whom lies the town of Gaugamela , as also Sue , situate upon the rocks .
Beyond these are the Silici , surnamed Classitae , through whose district runs the river Lycus on its passage from Armenia , the Absithris running south-east , the town of Accobis , and then in the plains the towns of Diospage , Polytelia , Stratonice , and Anthermis .
In the vicinity of the Euphrates is Nicephorium , of which we have already stated that Alexander , struck with the favourable situation of the spot , ordered it to be built .
We have also similarly made mention of Apamea on the Zeugma .
Leaving that city and going eastward , we come to Caphrena , a fortified town , formerly seventy stadia in extent , and called the " Court of the Satraps .
" It was to this place that the tribute was conveyed ; now it is reduced to a mere fortress .
Thaebata is still in the same state as formerly : after which comes Oruros , which under Pompeius Magnus formed the extreme limit of the Roman Empire , distant from Zeugma two hundred and fifty miles .
There are writers who say that the Euphrates was drawn off by an artificial channel by the governor Gobares , at the point where we have stated that it branches off , in order that it might not commit damage in the city of Babylonia , in consequence of the extreme rapidity of its course .
The Assyrians universally call this river by the name of Narmalcha , which signifies the " royal river .
" At the point where its waters divide , there was in former times a very large city , called Agranis , which the Persae have destroyed .
SOL Babylon , the capital of the nations of Chaldaea , long enjoyed the greatest celebrity of all cities throughout the whole world : and it is from this place that the remaining parts of Mesopotamia and Assyria received the name of Babylonia .
The circuit of its walls , which were two hundred feet in height , was sixty miles .
These walls were also fifty feet in breadth , reckoning to every foot three fingers' breadth beyond the ordinary measure of our foot .
The river Euphrates flowed through the city , with quays of marvellous workmanship erected on either side .
The temple there of Jupiter Belus is still in existence ; he was the first inventor of the science of Astronomy .
In all other respects it has been reduced to a desert , having been drained of its population in consequence of its vicinity to Seleucia , founded for that purpose by Nicator , at a distance of ninety miles , on the confluence of the Tigris and the canal that leads from the Euphrates .
Seleucia , however , still bears the surname of Babylonia : it is a free and independent city , and retains the features of the Macedonian manners .
It is said that the population of this city amounts to six hundred thousand , and that the outline of its walls resembles an eagle with expanded wings : its territory , they say , is the most fertile in all the East .
The Parthi again , in its turn , founded Ctesiphon , for the purpose of drawing away the population of Seleucia , at a distance of nearly three miles , and in the district of Chalonitis ; Ctesiphon is now the capital of all the Parthian kingdoms .
Finding , however , that this city did not answer the intended purpose , king Vologesus has of late years founded another city in its vicinity , Vologesocerta by name .
Besides the above , there are still the following towns in Mesopotamia : Hipparenum , rendered famous , like Babylon , by the learning of the Chaldaei , and situate near the river Narraga , which falls into the Narroga , from which a city so called has taken its name .
The Persae destroyed the walls of Hipparenum .
Orchenus also , a third place of learning of the Chaldaei , is situate in the same district , towards the south ; after which come the Notitae , the Orothophanitae , and the Grecichartae .
From Nearchus and Onesicritus we learn that the distance by water from the Persian Sea to Babylon , up the Euphrates , is four hundred and twelve miles ; other authors , however , who have written since their time , say that the distance to Seleucia is four hundred and forty miles : and Juba says that the distance from Babylon to Charax is one hundred and seventy-five .
Some writers state that the Euphrates continues to flow with an undivided channel for a distance of eighty-seven miles beyond Babylon , before its waters are diverted from their channel for the purposes of irrigation ; and that the whole length of its course is not less than twelve hundred miles .
The circumstance that so many different authors have treated of this subject , accounts for all these variations , seeing that even the Persian writers themselves do not agree as to what is the length of their schoeni and parasangoe , each assigning to them a different length .
SOL When the Euphrates ceases , by running in its channel , to afford protections to those who dwell on its banks , which it does when it approaches the confines of Charax , the country is immediately infested by the Attali , a predatory people of Arabia , beyond whom are found the Scenite .
The banks along this river are occupied by the Nomades of Arabia , as far as the deserts of Syria , from which , as we have already stated , it takes a turn to the south , and leaves the solitary deserts of Palmyra .
Seleucia is distant , by way of the Euphrates , from the beginning of Mesopotamia , eleven hundred and twenty-five ; from the Red Sea , by way of the Tigris , two hundred and twenty ; and from Zeugma , seven hundred and twenty-three , miles .
Zeugma is distant from Seleucia in Syria , on the shores of our sea , one hundred and seventy-five miles .
Such is the extent of the land that lies in these parts between the two seas .
The length of the kingdom of Parthia is nine hundred and eighteen miles .
SOL THE TIGRIS : There is , besides the above , another town in Mesopotamia , on the banks of the Tigris and near its confluence with the Euphrates , the name of which is Digba .
But it will be as well now to give some particulars respecting the Tigris itself .
This river rises in the region of Greater Armenia , from a very remarkable source , situate on a plain .
The name of the spot is Elegosine , and the stream , as soon as it begins to flow , though with a slow current , has the name of Diglito .
When its course becomes more rapid , it assumes the name of Tigris , given to it on account of its swiftness , that word signifying an arrow in the Median language .
It then flows into Lake Arethusa , the waters of which are able to support all weighty substances thrown into them , and exhale nitrous vapours .
This lake produces only one kind of fish , which , however , never enter the current of the river in its passage through the lake : and in a similar manner , the fish of the Tigris will never swim out of its stream into the waters of the lake .
Distinguishable from the lake , both by the rapidity and the colour of its waters , the tide of the river is hurried along ; after it has passed through and arrived at Mount Taurus , it disappears in a cavern of that mountain , and passing beneath it , bursts forth on the other side ; the spot bears the name of Zoroande .
That the waters on either side of the mountain are the same , is evident from the fact , that bodies thrown in on the one side will reappear on the other .
It then passes through another lake , called Thospites , and once more burying itself in the earth , reappears , after running a distance of twenty-two miles , in the vicinity of Nymphaion .
Claudius Caesar informs us that , in the district of Arrene it flows so near to the river Arsanias , that when their waters swell they meet and flow together , but without , however , intermingling .
For those of the Arsani , as he says , being lighter , float on the surface of the Tigris for a distance of nearly four miles , after which they separate , and the Arsanias flows into the Euphrates .
The Tigris , after flowing through Armenia and receiving the well-known rivers Parthenias and Nicephorion , separates the Arabian Orei from the Adiabeni , and then forms by its course , as previously mentioned , the country of Mesopotamia .
After traversing the mountains of the Gordyaei , it passes round Apamea , a town of Mesene , one hundred and twenty-five miles on this side of Babylonian Seleucia , and then divides into two channels , one of which runs southward , and flowing through Mesene , runs towards Seleucia , while the other takes a turn to the north and passes through the plains of the Cauchae , at the back of the district of Mesene .
When the waters have reunited , the river assumes the name of Pasitigris .
After this , it receives the Choaspes , which comes from Media ; and then , as we have already stated , flowing between Seleucia and Ctesiphon , discharges itself into the Chaldaean Lakes , which it supplies for a distance of seventy miles .
Escaping from them by a vast channel , it passes the city of Charax to the right , and empties itself into the Persian Sea , being ten miles in width at the mouth .
Between the mouths of the two rivers Tigris and the Euphrates , the distance was formerly twenty-five , or , according to some writers , seven miles only , both of them being navigable to the sea .
But the Orcheni and others who dwell on its banks , have long since dammed up the waters of the Euphrates for the purposes of irrigation , and it can only discharge itself into the sea by the aid of the Tigris .
SOL The country on the banks of the Tigris is called Parapotamia ; we have already made mention of Mesene , one of its districts .
Dabithac is a town there , adjoining to which is the district of Chalonitis , with the city of Ctesiphon , famous , not only for its palm-groves , but for its olives , fruits , and other shrubs .
Mount Zagrus reaches as far as this district , and extends from Armenia between the Medi and the Adiabeni , above Paraetacene and Persis .
Chalonitis is distant from Persis three hundred and eighty miles ; some writers say that by the shortest route it is the same distance from Assyria and the Caspian Sea .
SOL Between these peoples and Mesene is Sittacene , which is also called Arbelitis and Palaestine .
Its city of Sittaceis of Greek origin ; this and Sabdata lie to the east , and on the west is Antiochia , between the two rivers Tigris and Tornadotus , as also Apamea , to which Antiochus gave this name , being that of his mother .
The Tigris surrounds this city , which is also traversed by the waters of the Archous .
SOL Below this district is Susiane , in which is the city of Susa , the ancient residence of the kings of Persia , built by Darius , the son of Hystaspes ; it is distant from Seleucia Babylonia four hundred and fifty miles , and the same from Ecbatana of the Medi , by way of Mount Carbantus .
Upon the northern channel of the river Tigris is the town of Babytace , distant from Susa one hundred and thirty-five miles .
Here , for the only place in all the world , is gold held in abhorrence ; the people collect it together and bury it in the earth , that it may be of use to no one .
On the east of Susiane are the Oxii , a predatory people , and forty independent savage tribes of the Mizaei .
Above these are the Mardi and the Saitae , subject to Parthia : they extend above the district of Elymais , which we have already mentioned as joining up to the coast of Persis .
Susa is distant two hundred and fifty miles from the Persian Sea .
Near the spot where the fleet of Alexander came up the Pasitigris to Susa , there is a village situate on the Chaldaean Lake , Aple by name , from which to Susa is a distance of sixty miles and a half .
Adjoining to the people of Susiane , on the east , are the Cossiei ; and above them , to the north , is Mesabatene , lying at the foot of Mount Cambalidus , a branch of the Caucasian chain : from this point the country of the Bactri is most accessible .
SOL Susiane is separated from Elymais by the river Eulaeus , which rises in Media , and , after concealing itself in the earth for a short distance , rises again and flows through Mesabatene .
It then flows round the citadel of Susa and the temple of Diana , which is held in the highest veneration by all these nations ; the river itself being the object of many pompous ceremonials ; the kings , indeed , will drink of no other water , and for that reason carry it with them on their journies to any considerable distance .
This river receives the waters of the Hedypnos , which passes Asylus , in Persis , and those of the Aduna , which rises in Susiane .
Magoa is a town situate near it , and distant from Charax fifteen miles ; some writers place this town at the very extremity of Susiane , and close to the deserts .
SOL Below the Eulaeus is Elymais , upon the coast adjoining to Persis , and extending from the river Orates to Charax , a distance of two hundred and forty miles .
Its towns are Seleucia and Socrate , upon Mount Casyrus .
The shore which lies in front of this district is , as we have already stated , rendered inaccessible by mud , the rivers Brixa and Ortacea bringing down vast quantities of slime from the interior , — Elymais itself being so marshy that it is impossible to reach Persis that way , unless by going completely round : it is also greatly infested with serpents , which are brought down by the waters of these rivers .
That part of it which is the most inaccessible of all , bears the name of Characene , from Charax , the frontier city of the kingdoms of Arabia .
Of this place we will now make mention , after first stating the opinions of M .
Agrippa in relation to this subject .
That author informs us that Media , Parthia , and Persis , are bounded on the east by the Indus , on the west by the Tigris , on the north by Taurus and Caucasus , and on the south by the Red Sea ; that the length of these countries is thirteen hundred and twenty miles , and the breadth eight hundred and forty ; and that , in addition to these , there is Mesopotamia , which , taken by itself , is bounded on the east by the Tigris , on the west by the Euphrates , on the north by the chain of Taurus , and on the south by the Persian Sea , being eight hundred miles in length , and three hundred and sixty in breadth .
SOL Charax is a city situate at the furthest extremity of the Arabian Gulf , at which begins the more prominent portion of Arabia Felix : it is built on an artificial elevation , having the Tigris on the right , and the Eulaeus on the left , and lies on a piece of ground three miles in extent , just between the confluence of those streams .
It was first founded by Alexander the Great , with colonists from the royal city of Durine , which was then destroyed , and such of his soldiers as were invalided and left behind .
By his order it was to be called Alexandria , and a borough called Pella , from his native place , was to be peopled solely by Macedonians ; the city , however , was destroyed by inundations of the rivers .
Antiochus , the fifth king of Syria , afterwards rebuilt this place and called it by his own name ; and on its being again destroyed , Pasines , the son of Saggonadacus , and king of the neighbouring Arabians , whom Juba has incorrectly described as a satrap of king Antiochus , restored it , and raised embankments for its protection , calling it after himself .
These embankments extended in length a distance of nearly three miles , in breadth a little less .
It stood at first at a distance of ten stadia from the shore , and even had a harbour of its own .
But according to Juba , it is fifty miles from the sea ; and at the present day , the ambassadors from Arabia , and our own merchants who have visited the place , say that it stands at a distance of one hundred and twenty miles from the sea-shore .
Indeed , in no part of the world have alluvial deposits been formed more rapidly by the rivers , and to a greater extent than here ; and it is only a matter of surprise that the tides , which run to a considerable distance beyond this city , do not carry them back again .
At this place was born Dionysius , the most recent author of a description of the world ; he was sent by the late emperor Augustus to gather all necessary information in the East , when his eldest son was about to set out for Armenia to take the command against the Parthians and Arabians .
SOL The fact has not escaped me , nor indeed have I forgotten , that at the beginning of this work I have remarked that each author appeared to be most accurate in the description of his own country ; still , while I am speaking of these parts of the world , I prefer to follow the discoveries made by the Roman arms , and the description given by king Juba , in his work dedicated to Caius Caesar above-mentioned , on the subject of the same expedition against Arabia .
SOL ARABIA : Arabia , inferior to no country throughout the whole world , is of immense extent , running downwards , as we have previously stated , from Mount Amanus , over against Cilicia and Commagene ; many of the Arabian nations having been removed to those countries by Tigranes the Great , while others again have migrated of their own accord to the shores of our sea and the coast of Egypt , as we have already mentioned .
The Nubei have even penetrated as far as Mount Libanus in the middle of Syria ; in their turn they are bounded by the Ramisi , these by the Taranei , and these again by the Patami .
SOL As for Arabia itself , it is a peninsula , running out between the Red and the Persian Seas ; and it is by a kind of design , apparently on the part of nature , that it is surrounded by the sea in such a manner as to resemble very much the form and size of Italy , there being no difference either in the climate of the two countries , as they lie in the same latitudes .
This , too , renders it equally fertile with the countries of Italy .
We have already mentioned its peoples , which extend from our sea as far as the deserts of Palmyrene , and we shall now proceed to a description of the remainder .
The Scenitae , as we have already stated , border upon the Nomades and the tribes that ravage the territories of Chaldaea , being themselves of wandering habits , and receiving their name from the tents which constitute their dwellings ; these are made of goats' hair , and they pitch them wherever they please .
Next after them are the Nabataei , who have a city called Petra , which lies in a deep valley , somewhat less than two miles in width , and surrounded by inaccessible mountains , between which a river flows : it is distant from the city of Gaza , on our shores , six hundred miles , and from the Persian Gulf one hundred and thirty-five .
At this place two roads meet , the one leading from Syria to Palmyra , and the other from Gaza .
On leaving Petra we come to the Omani , who dwell as far as Charax , with their once famous cities which were built by Semiramis , Besannisa and Soractia by name ; at the present day they are wildernesses .
We next come to a city situate on the banks of the Pasitigris , Fora by name , and subject to the king of Charax : to this place people resort on their road from Petra , and sail thence to Charax , twelve miles distant , with the tide .
If you are proceeding by water from the Parthian territories , you come to a village known as Teredon ; and below the confluence of the Euphrates and Tigris , you have the Chaldaei dwelling on the left side of the river , and the Nomadic tribes of the Scenitae on the right .
Some writers also make mention of two other cities situate at long intervals , as you sail along the Tigris , Barbatia , and then Thumata , distant from Petra , they say , ten days' sail ; our merchants report that these places are subject to the king of Charax .
The same writers also state , that Apamea is situate where the overflow of the Euphrates unites with the Tigris ; and that when the Parthians meditate an incursion , the inhabitants dam up the river by embankments , and so inundate their country .
SOL We will now proceed to describe the coast after leaving Charax , which was first explored by order of king Epiphanes .
We first come to the place where the mouth of the Euphrates formerly existed , the river Salsus , and the Promontory of Chaldone , from which spot , the sea along the coast , for an extent of fifty miles , bears more the aspect of a series of whirlpools than of ordinary sea ; the river Achenus , and then a desert tract for a space of one hundred miles , until we come to the island of Ichara ; the gulf of Capeus , on the shores of which dwell the Gaulopes and the Chateni , and then the gulf of Gerra .
Here we find the city of Gerra , five miles in circumference , with towers built of square blocks of salt .
Fifty miles from the coast , lying in the interior , is the region of Attene , and opposite to Gerra is the island of Tylos , as many miles distant from the shore ; it is famous for the vast number of its pearls , and has a town of the same name ; in its vicinity there is a smaller island , distant from a promontory on the larger one twelve miles and a half .
They say that beyond this large islands may be seen , upon which no one has ever landed : the circumference of the smaller island is one hundred and twelve miles and a half ; and it is more than that distance from the Persian coast , being accessible by only one narrow channel .
We then come to the island of Asclie , and the nations of the Nocheti , the Zurazi , the Borgodi , the Catharrei , the Nomades , and then the river Cynos .
Beyond this , the navigation is impracticable on that side , according to Juba , on account of the rocks ; and he has omitted all mention of Batrasave , a town of the Omani , and of the city of Omana , which former writers have made out to be a famous port of Carmania ; as also of Homna and Attana , towns which at the present day , our merchants say , are by far the most famous ones in the Persian Sea .
Passing the river Cynos , there is a mountain , Juba says , that bears marks of the action of fire ; also , the nation of the Epimaranitae , then a nation of Ichthyophagi , and then a desert island , and the nation of the Bathymi .
We then come to the Eblitaean Mountains , the island of Omoenus , the port of Mochorbe , the islands of Etaxalos and Inchobrice , and the nation of the Cadaei .
There are many islands also that have no name , but the better known ones are Isura , Rhinnea , and another still nearer the shore , upon which there are some stone pillars with an inscription in unknown characters .
There are also the port of Goboea , the desert islands called Bragae , the nation of the Thaludaei , the region of Dabanegoris , Mount Orsa , with a harbour , the gulf of Duatus , with numerous islands , Mount Tricoryphos , the region of Cardaleon , and the islands called Solanades , Cachinna , and that of the Ichthyophagi .
We then find the Clari , the shore of Mamaion , on which there are gold mines , the region of Canauna , the nations of the Apitami and the Casani , the island of Devade , the fountain of Coralis , the Carphati , the islands of Calaeu and Amnamethus , and the nation of the Darrae .
Also , the island of Chelonitis , numerous islands of Ichthyophagi , the deserts of Odanda , Basa , many islands of the Sabaei , the rivers Thanar and Amnume , the islands of Dorice , and the fountains of Daulotos and Dora .
We find also the islands of Pteros , Labatanis , Coboris , and Sambrachate , with a town of the same name on the mainland .
Lying to the south are a great number of islands , the largest of which is Camari ; also the river Musecros , and the port of Laupas .
We then come to the Sabaei , a nation of Scenitae , with numerous islands , and the city of Acila , which is their mart , and from which persons embark for India .
We next come to the region of Amithoscutta .
Damnia , the Greater and the Lesser Mizi , and the Drimati .
The promontory of the Naumachaei , over against Carmania , is distant from it fifty miles .
A wonderful circumstance is said to have happened here ; Numenius , who was made governor of Mesena by king Antiochus , while fighting against the Persians , defeated them at sea , and at low water , by land , with an army of cavalry , on the same day ; in memory of which event he erected a twofold trophy on the same spot , in honour of Jupiter and Neptune .
SOL Opposite to this place , in the main sea , lies the island of Ogyris , famous for being the burial-place of king Erythras ; it is distant from the mainland one hundred and twenty miles , being one hundred and twelve in circumference .
No less famous is another island , called Dioscoridu , and lying in the Azanian Sea ; it is distant two hundred and eighty miles from the extreme point of the Promontory of Syagrus .
SOL The remaining places and nations on the mainland , lying still to the south , are the Ausaritae , to whose country it is seven days' journey among the mountains , the nations of the Larendani and the Catabani , and the Gebanitae , who occupy a great number of towns , the largest of which are Nagia , and Thomna with sixty-five temples , a number which fully bespeaks its size .
We then come to a promontory , from which to the mainland of the Troglodytae it is fifty miles , and then the Thoani , the Actaei , the Chatramotitae , the Tonabei , the Antidalei , the Lexianae , the Agraei , the Cerbani , and the Sabaei , the best known of all the tribes of Arabia , on account of their frankincense ; these nations extend from sea to sea .
The towns which belong to them on the Red Sea are Marane , Marma , Corolia , and Sabatha ; and in the interior , Nascus , Cardava , Carnus , and Thomala , from which they bring down their spices for exportation .
One portion of this nation is the Atramitae , whose capital , Sabota , has sixty temples within its walls .
But the royal city of all these nations is Mariaba ; it lies upon a bay , ninety-four miles in extent , and filled with islands that produce perfumes .
Lying in the interior , and joining up to the Atramitae , are the Mitaei ; are the Minae ; the Elamitae dwell on the sea-shore , in a city from which they take their name .
Next to these are the Chaculatae ; then the town of Sibi , by the Greeks called Apate ; the Arsi , the Codani , the Vadei , who dwell in a large town , the Barasasaei , the Lechieni , and the island of Sygaros , into the interior of which no dogs are admitted , and so being exposed on the sea shore , they wander about there and are left to die .
We then come to a gulf which runs far into the interior , upon which are situate the Laenitae , who have given to it their name ; also their royal city of Agra , and upon the gulf that of Laeana , or as some call it Aelana ; indeed , by some of our writers this has been called the Aelanitic Gulf , and by others again , the Aelenitic ; Artemidorus calls it the Alenitic , and Juba the Laenitic .
The circumference of Arabia , measured from Charax to Laeana , is said to be four thousand six hundred and sixty-six miles , but Juba thinks that it is somewhat less than four thousand .
Its widest part is at the north , between the cities of Heroopolis and Charax .
We will now mention the remaining places and peoples of the interior of Arabia .
SOL Up to the Nabataei the ancients joined the Thimanei ; at present they have next to them the Taveni , and then the Suelleni , the Arraeeni , and the Areni , whose town is the centre of all the commerce of these parts .
Next come the Hemnatae , the Aualitae , the towns of Domata and Hegra , the Tamudaei , with the town of Badanatha , the Carrei , with the town of Cariati , the Achoali , with the town of Foth , and the Minaei , who derive their origin , it is supposed , from Minos , king of Crete , and of whom the Carmaei are a tribe .
Next comes a town , fourteen miles distant , called Marippa , and belonging to the Palamaces , a place by no means to be overlooked , and then Carnon .
The Rhadamaei also — these too are supposed to derive their origin from Rhadamanthus , the brother of Minos — the Homeritae , with their city of Masala , the Hamirei , the Gedranitae , the Amphyrae , the Ilisanitae , the Bachilitae , the Samnaei , the Amitei , with the towns of Nessa and Cennesseris , the Zamareni , with the towns of Sagiatta and Canthace , the Bacascami , the town of Riphearma , the name by which they call barley , the Autei , the Ethravi , the Cyrei and the Mathatraei , the Helmodenes , with the town of Ebode , the Agacturi , dwelling in the mountains , with a town twenty miles distant , in which is a fountain called Aenuscabales , which signifies " the town of the camels .
" Ampelome also , a Milesian colony , the town of Athrida , the Calingii , whose city is called Mariva , and signifies " the lord of all men ;" the towns of Palon and Murannimal , near a river by which it is thought that the Euphrates discharges itself , the nations of the Agrei and the Ammonii , the town of Athenae , the Caunaravi , a name which signifies " most rich in herds ," the Coranitae , the Oesani , and the Choani .
Here were also formerly the Greek towns of Arethusa , Larisa , and Chalcis , which have been destroyed in various wars .
SOL Aelius Gallus , a member of the Equestrian order , is the sole person who has hitherto carried the Roman arms into these lands , for Gaius Caesar , the son of Augustus , only had a distant view of Arabia .
In his expedition , Gallus destroyed the following towns , the names of which are not given by the authors who had written before his time , Negrana , Nestum , Nesca , Masugum , Caminacum , Labecia , and Mariva abovementioned , six miles in circumference , as also Caripeta , the furthest point of his expedition .
He brought back with him the following discoveries — that the Nomades live upon milk and the flesh of wild beasts , and that the other nations , like the Indians , extract a sort of wine from the palm-tree , and oil from sesame .
He says that the most numerous of these tribes are the Homeritae and the Minaei , that their lands are fruitful in palms and shrubs , and that their chief wealth is centred in their flocks .
We also learn from the same source that the Cerbani and the Agraei excel in arms , but more particularly the Chatramotitae ; that the territories of the Carrei are the most extensive and most fertile ; but that the Sabaei are the richest of all in the great abundance of their spice-bearing groves , their mines of gold , their streams for irrigation , and their ample produce of honey and wax .
Of their perfumes we shall have to treat more at large in the Book devoted to that subject .
The Arabs either wear the mitra , or else go with their hair unshorn , while the beard is shaved , except upon the upper lip : some tribes , however , leave even the beard unshaved .
A singular thing too , one half of these almost innumerable tribes live by the pursuits of commerce , the other half by rapine : take them all in all , they are the richest nations in the world , seeing that such vast wealth flows in upon them from both the Roman and the Parthian Empires ; for they sell the produce of the sea or of their forests , while they purchase nothing whatever in return .
SOL THE GULFS OF THE RED SEA : We will now trace the rest of the coast that lies opposite to that of Arabia .
Timosthenes has estimated the length of the whole gulf at four days' sail , and the breadth at two , making the Straits to be seven miles and a half in width .
Eratosthenes says that the length of the shore from the mouth of the gulf is thirteen hundred miles on each side , while Artemidorus states that the length on the Arabian side is seventeen hundred and fifty miles , and that along the Troglodytic coast , to Ptolemais , the distance is eleven hundred and thirty-seven and a half .
Agrippa , however , maintains that there is no difference whatever in the length of the two sides , and makes it seventeen hundred and twenty-two miles .
Most writers mention the length as being four hundred and seventy-five miles , and make the Straits to face the southeast , being twelve miles wide according to some , fifteen according to others .
SOL The localities of this region are as follow : On passing the Aelanitic Gulf there is another gulf , by the Arabians called Soea , upon which is situate the city of Heroon .
The town of Cambysu also stood here formerly , between the Neli and the Marchades , Cambyses having established there the invalids of his army .
We then come to the nation of the Tyri , and the port of the Danei , from which place an attempt has been made to form a navigable canal to the river Nile , at the spot where it enters the Delta previously mentioned , the distance between the river and the Red Sea being sixty-two miles .
This was contemplated first of all by Sesostris , king of Egypt , afterwards by Darius , king of the Persians , and still later by Ptolemy 2. , who also made a canal , one hundred feet in width and forty deep , extending a distance of thirty-seven miles and a half , as far as the Bitter Springs .
He was deterred from proceeding any further with this work by apprehensions of an inundation , upon finding that the Red Sea was three cubits higher than the land in the interior of Egypt .
Some writers , however , do not allege this as the cause , but say that his reason was , a fear lest , in consequence of introducing the sea , the water of the Nile might be spoilt , that being the only source from which the Egyptians obtain water for drinking .
Be this as it may , the whole of the journey from the Egyptian Sea is usually performed by land one of the three following ways : — Either from Pelusium across the sands , in doing which the only method of finding the way is by means of reeds fixed in the earth , the wind immediately effacing all traces of footsteps : by the route which begins two miles beyond Mount Casius , and at a distance of sixty miles enters the road from Pelusium , adjoining to which road the Arabian tribe of the Autei dwell ; or else by a third route , which leads from Gerrum , and which they call Adipsos , passing through the same Arabians , and shorter by nearly sixty miles , but running over rugged mountains and through a district destitute of water .
All these roads lead to Arsinoe , a city founded in honour of his sister 's name , upon the Gulf of Carandra , by Ptolemy Philadelphus , who was the first to explore Troglodytice , and called the river which flows before Arsinoe by the name of Ptolemaeus .
After this comes the little town of Enum , by some writers mentioned as Philotera ; next to which are the Abasaei , a nation sprung from intermarriages with the Troglodytae , then some wild Arabian tribes , the islands of Sapirine and Scytala , and after these , deserts as far as Myoshormon , where we find the fountain of Tatnos , Mount Aeas , the island of Iambe , and numerous harbours .
Berenice also , is here situate , so called after the name of the mother of Philadelphus , and to which there is a road from Coptos , as we have previously stated ; then the Arabian Autei , and the Zebadei .
SOL TROGLODYTICE : Troglodytice comes next , by the ancients called Midoe , and by some Michoe ; here is Mount Pentedactylos , some islands called Stenae Deirae , the Halonnesi , a group of islands not less in number , Cardamine , and Topazos , which last has given its name to the precious stone so called .
The gulf is full of islands ; those known as Mareu are supplied with fresh water , those called Erenos , are without it ; these were ruled by governors appointed by the kings .
In the interior are the Candei , also called Ophiophagi , a people in the habit of eating serpents ; there is no region in existence more productive of them .
SOL Juba , who appears to have investigated all these matters with the greatest diligence , has omitted , in his description of these regions — unless , indeed , it be an error in the copying — another place called Berenice and surnamed Panchrysos , as also a third surnamed Epidires , and remarkable for the peculiarity of its site ; for it lies on a long projecting neck of land , at the spot where the Straits at the mouth of the Red Sea separate the coast of Africa from Arabia by a distance of seven miles only : here too is the island of Cytis , which also produces the topaz .
SOL Beyond this are forests , in which is Ptolemais , built by Philadelphus for the chase of the elephant , and thence called Epitheras , situate near Lake Monoleus .
This is the same region that has been already mentioned by us in the Second Book , and in which , during forty-five days before the summer solstice and for as many after , there is no shadow at the sixth hour , and during the other hours of the day it falls to the south ; while at other times it falls to the north ; whereas at the Berenice of which we first made mention , on the day of the summer solstice the shadow totally disappears at the sixth hour , but no other unusual phaenomenon is observed .
That place is situate at a distance of six hundred and two miles from Ptolemais , which has thus become the subject of a remarkable theory , and has promoted the exercise of a spirit of the most profound investigation ; for it was at this spot that the extent of the earth was first ascertained , it being the fact that Erastosthenes , beginning at this place by the accurate calculation of the length of the shadow , was enabled to determine with exactness the dimensions of the earth .
SOL After passing this place we come to the Azanian Sea , a promontory by some writers called Hispalus , Lake Mandalum , and the island of Colocasitis , with many others lying out in the main sea , upon which multitudes of turtles are found .
We then come to the town of Suche , the island of Daphnidis , and the town of the Adulitae , a place founded by Egyptian runaway slaves .
This is the principal mart for the Troglodytes , as also for the people of Aethiopia : it is distant from Ptolemais five days' sail .
To this place they bring ivory in large quantities , horns of the rhinoceros , hides of the hippopotamus , tortoise-shell , sphingiae , and slaves .
Beyond the Aethiopian Aroterae are the islands known by the name of Aliaeu , as also those of Bacchias , Antibacchias , and Stratioton .
After passing these , on the coast of Aethiopia , there is a gulf which remains unexplored still ; a circumstance the more to be wondered at , seeing that merchants have pursued their investigations to a greater distance than this .
We then come to a promontory , upon which there is a spring called Cucios , much resorted to by mariners .
Beyond it is the Port of Isis , distant ten days' rowing from the town of the Adulitae : myrrh is brought to this port by the Troglodytae .
The two islands before the harbour are called Pseudepylae , and those in it , the same in number , are known as Pylae ; upon one of these there are some stone columns inscribed with unknown characters .
Beyond these is the Gulf of Abalites , the island of Diodorus , and other desert islands ; also , on the mainland , a succession of deserts , and then the town of Gaza , and the Mossylites promontory and port , to the latter of which cinnamon is brought for exportation : it was thus far that Sesostris led his army .
SOL Some writers place even beyond this , upon the shore , one town of Ethiopia , called Baragaza .
Juba will have it that at the Promontory of Mossylum the Atlantic Sea begins , and that with a north-west wind we may sail past his native country , the Mauritanias , and arrive at Gades .
We ought not on this occasion to curtail any portion of the opinions so expressed by him .
He says that after we pass the promontory of the Indians , known as Lepteacra , and by others called Drepanum , the distance , in a straight line , beyond the island of Exusta and Malichu , is fifteen hundred miles ; from thence to a place called Sceneos two hundred and twenty-five ; and from thence to the island of Adanu one hundred and fifty miles ; so that the distance to the open sea is altogether eighteen hundred and seventy-five miles .
All the other writers , however , are of opinion that , in consequence of the intensity of the sun 's heat , this sea is not navigable ; added to which , commerce is greatly exposed to the depredations of a piratical tribe of Arabians called Ascitae , who dwell upon the islands : placing two inflated skins of oxen beneath a raft of wood , they ply their piratical vocation with the aid of. poisoned arrows .
We learn also from the same author that some nations of the Troglodytae have the name of Therothoae , being so called from their skill in hunting .
They are remarkable for their swiftness , he says , just as the Ichthyophagi are , who can swim like the animals whose element is the sea .
He speaks also of the Bangeni , the Gangorae , the Chalybes , the Xoxinae , the Sirechae , the Daremae , and the Domazames .
Juba states , too , that the inhabitants who dwell on the banks of the Nile from Syene as far as Meroe , are not a people of Aethiopia , but Arabians ; and that the city of the Sun , which we have mentioned as situate not far from Memphis , in our description of Egypt , was founded by Arabians .
There are some writers who take away the further bank of the Nile from Aethiopia , and unite it to Africa ; and they people its sides with tribes attracted thither by its water .
We shall leave these matters , however , to the option of each , to form his opinion on them , and shall now proceed to mention the towns on each side in the order in which they are given .
SOL ETHIOPIA : On leaving Syene , and taking first the Arabian side , we find the nation of the Catadupi , then the Syenitae , and the town of Tacompsos , by some called Thatice , as also Aramasos , Sesamos , Sanduma , Masindomacam , Arabeta and Boggia , Leupitorga , Tantarene , Mecindita , Noa , Gloploa , Gystate , Megada , Lea , Renni , Nups , Direa , Patiga , Bacata , Dumana , Rhadata , at which place a golden cat was worshipped as a god , Boron , in the interior , and Mallos , near Meroe ; this is the account given by Bion .
SOL Juba , however , gives another account ; he says that there is a city on Mount Megatichos , which lies between Egypt and Ethiopia , by the Arabians known as Myrson , after which come Tacompsos , Aramus , Sesamos , Pide , Mamuda , Orambis , situate near a stream of bitumen , Amodita , Prosda , Parenta , Mama , Tesatta , Gallas , Zoton , Graucome , Emeus , the Pidibotae , the Hebdomecontacometae , Nomades , who dwell in tents , Cyste , Macadagale , Proaprimis , Nups , Detrelis , Patis , the Ganbreves , the Magasnei , Segasmala , Crandala , Denna , Cadeuma , Thena , Batta , Alana , Mascoa , the Scamini , Hora , situate on an island , and then Abala , Androgalis , Sesecre , the Malli , and Agole .
SOL On the African side we find mentioned , either what is another place with the same name of Tacompsos , or else a part of the one before-mentioned , and after it Moggore , Saea , Edos , Plenariae , Pinnis , Magassa , Buma , Linthuma , Spintum , Sydop , the Censi , Pindicitora , Acug , Orsum , Sansa , Maumarum , Urbim , the town of Molum , by the Greeks called Hypaton , Pagoarca , Zmanes , at which point elephants begin to be found , the Mambli , Berressa , and Acetuma ; there was formerly a town also called Epis , over against Meroe , which had , however , been destroyed before Bion wrote .
SOL These are the names of places given as far as Meroe : but at the present day hardly any of them on either side of the river are in existence ; at all events , the praetorian troops that were sent by the Emperor Nero under the command of a tribune , for the purposes of enquiry , when , among his other wars , he was contemplating an expedition against Aethiopia , brought back word that they had met with nothing but deserts on their route .
The Roman arms also penetrated into these regions in the time of the late Emperor Augustus , under the command of P .
Petronius , a man of Equestrian rank , and prefect of Egypt .
That general took the following cities , the only ones we now find mentioned there , in the following order ; Pselcis , Primis , Abuncis , Phthuris , Cambusis , Atteva , and Stadasis , where the river Nile , as it thunders down the precipices , has quite deprived the inhabitants of the power of hearing : he also sacked the town of Napata .
The extreme distance to which he penetrated beyond Syene was nine hundred and seventy miles ; but still , it was not the Roman arms that rendered these regions a desert .
Aethiopia , in its turn gaining the mastery , and then again reduced to servitude , was at last worn out by its continual wars with Egypt , having been a famous and powerful country even at the time of the Trojan War , when Memnon was its king ; it is also very evident from the fabulous stories about Andromeda , that it ruled over Syria in the time of king Cepheus , and that its sway extended as far as the shores of our sea .
SOL In a similar manner , also , there have been conflicting accounts as to the extent of this country : first by Dalion , who travelled a considerable distance beyond Meroe , and after him by Aristocreon and Basilis , as well as the younger Simonides , who made a stay of five years at Meroe , when he wrote his account of Aethiopia .
Timosthenes , however , the commander of the fleets of Philadelphus , without giving any other estimate as to the distance , says that Meroe is sixty days' journey from Syene ; while Eratosthenes states that the distance is six hundred and twenty-five miles , and Artemidorus six hundred .
Sebosus says that from the extreme point of Egypt , the distance to Meroe is sixteen hundred and seventy-five miles , while the other writers last mentioned make it twelve hundred and fifty .
All these differences , however , have since been settled ; for the persons sent by Nero for the purposes of discovery have reported that the distance from Syene to Meroe is eight hundred and seventy-one miles , the following being the items .
From Syene to Hiera Sycaminos they make to be fifty-four miles , from thence to Tama seventy-two , to the country of the Evonymitae , the first region of Aethiopia , one hundred and twenty , to Acina fifty-four , to Pittara twenty-five , and to Tergedus one hundred and six .
They state also that the island of Gagaudes lies at an equal distance from Syene and Meroe , and that it is at this place that the bird called the parrot was first seen ; while at another island called Articula , the animal known as the sphingium was first discovered by them , and after passing Tergedus , the cynocephalus .
The distance from thence to Napata is eighty miles , that little town being the only one of all of them that now survives .
From thence to the island of Meroe the distance is three hundred and sixty miles .
They also state that the grass in the vicinity of Meroe becomes of a greener and fresher colour , and that there is some slight appearance of forests , as also traces of the rhinoceros and elephant .
They reported also that the city of Meroe stands at a distance of seventy miles from the first entrance of the island of Meroe , and that close to it is another island , Tadu by name , which forms a harbour facing those who enter the right hand channel of the river .
The buildings in the city , they said , were but few in number , and they stated that a female , whose name was Candace , ruled over the district , that name having passed from queen to queen for many years .
They related also that there was a temple of Jupiter Hammon there , held in great veneration , besides smaller shrines erected in honour of him throughout all the country .
In addition to these particulars , they were informed that in the days of the Aethiopian dominion , the island of Meroe enjoyed great renown , and that , according to tradition , it was in the habit of maintaining two hundred thousand armed men , and four thousand artisans .
The kings of Aethiopia are said even at the present day to be forty-five in number .
SOL The whole of this country has successively had the names of Aetheria , Atlantia , and last of all , Aethiopia , from Aethiops , the son of Vulcan .
It is not at all surprising that towards the extremity of this region the men and animals assume a monstrous form , when we consider the changeableness and volubility of fire , the heat of which is the great agent in imparting various forms and shapes to bodies .
Indeed , it is reported that in the interior , on the eastern side , there is a people that have no noses , the whole face presenting a plane surface ; that others again are destitute of the upper lip , and others are without tongues .
Others again , have the mouth grown together , and being destitute of nostrils , breathe through one passage only , imbibing their drink through it by means of the hollow stalk of the oat , which there grows spontaneously and supplies them with its grain for food .
Some of these nations have to employ gestures by nodding the head and moving the limbs , instead of speech .
Others again were unacquainted with the use of fire before the time of Ptolemy Lathyrus , king of Egypt .
Some writers have also stated that there is a nation of Pygmies , which dwells among the marshes in which the river Nile takes its rise ; while on the coast of , Aethiopia , where we paused , there is a range of mountains , of a red colour , which have the appearance of being always burning .
SOL All the country , after we pass Meroe , is bounded by the Troglodytae and the Red Sea , it being three days' journey from Napata to the shores of that sea ; throughout the whole of this district the rain water is carefully preserved at several places , while the country that lies between is extremely productive of gold .
The parts beyond this are inhabited by the Adabuli , a nation of Aethiopia ; and here , over against Meroe , are the Megabarri , by some writers called the Adiabari ; they occupy the city of Apollo ; some of them , however , are Nomades , living on the flesh of elephants .
Opposite to them , on the African side , dwell the Macrobii , and then again , beyond the Megabarri , there are the Memnones and the Dabeli , and , at a distance of twenty days' journey , the Critensi .
Beyond these are the Dochi , and then the Gymnetes , who always go naked ; and after them the Andetae , the Mothitae , the Mesaches , and the Ipsodorae , who are of a black tint , but stain the body all over with a kind of red earth .
On the African side again there are the Medimni , and then a nation of Nomades , who live on the milk of the cynocephalus , and then the Aladi and the Syrbotae , which last are said to be eight cubits in height .
SOL Aristocreon informs us that on the Libyan side , at a distance of five days' journey from Meroe , is the town of Tolles , and then at a further distance of twelve days' journey , Esar , a town founded by the Egyptians who fled from Psammetichus ; he states also that they dwelt there for a period of three hundred years , and that opposite , on the Arabian side , there is a town of theirs called Daron .
The town , however , which he calls Esar , is by Bion called Sape , who says that the name means " the strangers :" their capital being Sembobitis , situate on an island , and a third place of theirs , Sinat in Arabia .
Between the mountains and the river Nile are the Simbarri , the Palugges , and , on the mountains themselves , the Asachae , who are divided into numerous peoples ; they are said to be distant five days' journey from the sea , and to procure their subsistence by the chase of the elephant .
An island in the Nile , which belongs to the Semberritae , is governed by a queen ; beyond it are the Aethiopian Nubei , at a distance of eight days' journey : their town is Tenupsis , situate on the Nile .
There are the Sesambri also , a people among whom all the quadrupeds are without ears , the very elephants even .
On the African side are the Tonobari , the Ptoenphae , a people who have a dog for their king , and divine from his movements what are his commands ; the Auruspi , who have a town at a considerable distance from the Nile , and then the Archisarmi , the Phaliges , the Marigerri , and the Casmari .
SOL Bion makes mention also of some other towns situate on islands , the whole distance being twenty days' journey from Sembobitis to Meroe ; a town in an adjoining island , under the queen of the Semberritae , with another called Asara , and another , in a second island , called Darde .
The name of a third island is Medoe , upon which is the town of Asel , and a fourth is called Garodes , with a town upon it of the same name .
Passing thence along the banks of the Nile , are the towns of Navi , Modunda , Andatis , Secundum , Colligat , Secande , Navectabe , Cumi , Agrospi , Aegipa , Candrogari , Araba , and Summara .
SOL Beyond is the region of Sirbitum , at which the mountains terminate , and which by some writers is said to contain the maritime Aethiopians , the Nisacaethae , and the Nisyti , a word which signifies " men with three or four eyes ," — not that the people really have that conformation , but because they are remarkable for the unerring aim of their arrows .
On that side of the Nile which extends along the borders of the Southern Ocean beyond the Greater Syrtes , Dalion says that the people , who use rain-water only , are called the Cisori , and that the other nations are the Longompori , distant five days' journey from the Oecalices , the Usibalci , the Isbeli , the Perusii , the Ballii , and the Cispii , the rest being deserts , and inhabited by the tribes of fable only .
In a more westerly direction are the Nigroae , whose king has only one eye , and that in the forehead , the Agriophagi , who live principally on the flesh of panthers and lions , the Pamphagi , who will eat anything , the Anthropophagi , who live on human flesh , the Cynamolgi , a people with the heads of dogs , the Artabatitae , who have four feet , and wander about after the manner of will beasts ; and , after them , the Hesperiae and the Perorsi , whom we have already spoken of as dwelling on the confines of Mauritania .
Some tribes , too , of the Aethiopians subsist on nothing but locusts , which are smoke-dried and salted as their provision for the year ; these people do not live beyond their fortieth year .
SOL M. Agrippa was of opinion that the length of the whole country of the Aethiopians , including the Red Sea , was two thousand one hundred and seventy miles , and its breadth , including Upper Egypt , twelve hundred and ninety-seven .
Some authors again have made the following divisions of its length ; from Meroe to Sirbitum eleven days' sail , from Sirbitum to the Dabelli fifteen days ' , and from them to the Aethiopian Ocean six days' journey .
It is agreed by most authors , that the distance altogether , from the ocean to Meroe , is six hundred and twenty-five miles , and from Meroe to Syene , that which we have already mentioned .
Aethiopia lies from south-east to south-west .
Situate as it is , in a southern hemisphere , forests of ebony are to be seen of the brightest verdure ; and in the midst of these regions there is a mountain of immense height , which overhangs the sea , and emits a perpetual flame .
By the Greeks this mountain is called Theon Ochema , and at a distance of four days' sail from it is a promontory , known as Hesperu Ceras , upon the confines of Africa , and close to the Hesperiae , an Aethiopian nation .
There are some writers who affirm that in these regions there are hills of a moderate height , which afford a pleasant shade from the groves with which they are clad , and are the haunts of Aegipans and Satyrs .
SOL ISLANDS OF THE AETHIOPIAN SEA : We learn from Ephorus , as well as Eudoxus and Timosthenes , that there are great numbers of islands scattered all over this sea ; Clitarchus says that king Alexander was informed of an island so rich that the inhabitants gave a talent of gold for a horse , and of another upon which there was found a sacred mountain , shaded with a grove , the trees of which emitted odours of wondrous sweetness ; this last was situate over against the Persian Gulf .
Cerne is the name of an island situate opposite to Aethiopia , the size of which has not been ascertained , nor yet its distance from the main land : it is said that its inhabitants are exclusively Aethiopians .
Ephorus states that those who sail from the Red Sea into the Aethiopian Ocean cannot get beyond the Columnae there , some little islands so called .
Polybius says that Cerne is situate at the extremity of Mauritania , over against Mount Atlas , and at a distance of eight stadia from the land ; while Cornelius Nepos states that it lies very nearly in the same meridian as Carthage , at a distance from the mainland of ten miles , and that it is not more than two miles in circumference .
It is said also that there is another island situate over against Mount Atlas , being itself known by the name of Atlantis .
Five days' sail beyond it there are deserts , as far as the Aethiopian Hesperiae and the promontory , which we have mentioned as being called Hesperu Ceras , a point at which the face of the land first takes a turn towards the west and the Atlantic Sea .
Facing this promontory are also said to be the islands called the Gorgades , the former abodes of the Gorgons , two days' sail from the mainland , according to Xenophon of Lampsacus .
Hanno , a general of the Carthaginians , penetrated as far as these regions , and brought back an account that the bodies of the women were covered with hair , but that the men , through their swiftness of foot , made their escape ; in proof of which singularity in their skin , and as evidence of a fact so miraculous , he placed the skins of two of these females in the temple of Juno , which were to be seen there until the capture of Carthage .
Beyond these even , are said to be the two islands of the Hesperides ; but so uncertain are all the accounts relative to this subject , that Statius Sebosus says that it is forty days' sail , past the coast of the Atlas range , from the islands of the Gorgons to those of the Hesperides , and one day 's sail from these to the Hesperu Ceras .
Nor have we any more certain information relative to the islands of Mauritania .
We only know , as a fact well-ascertained , that some few were discovered by Juba over against the country of the Autololes , upon which he established a manufactory of Gaetulian purple .
SOL THE FORTUNATE ISLANDS : There are some authors who think that beyond these are the Fortunate Islands , and some others ; the number of which Sebosus gives , as well as the distances , informing us that Junonia is an island seven hundred and fifty miles distant from Gades .
He states also that Pluvialia and Capraria are the same distance from Junonia , to the west ; and that in Pluvialia the only fresh water to be obtained is rain water .
He then states that at a distance of two hundred and fifty miles from these , opposite the left of Mauritania , and situate in the direction of the sun at the eighth hour , are the Fortunate Islands , one of which , from its undulating surface , has the name of Invallis , and another that of Planasia , from the peculiarity of its appearance .
He states also that the circumference of Invallis is three hundred miles , and that trees grow to a height of one hundred and fourteen feet .
SOL Relative to the Fortunate Islands , Juba has ascertained the following facts : that they are situate to the south in nearly a due westerly direction , and at a distance from the Purple Islands of six hundred and twenty-five miles , the sailing being made for two hundred and fifty miles due west , and then three hundred and seventy-five towards the east .
He states that the first is called Ombrios , and that it presents no traces of buildings whatever ; that among the mountains there is a lake , and some trees , which bear a strong resemblance to giant fennel , and from which water is extracted ; that drawn from those that are black is of a bitter taste , but that produced by the white ones is agreeable and good for drinking .
He states also that a second island has the name of Junonia , but that it contains nothing beyond a small temple of stone : also that in its vicinity there is another , but smaller , island of the same name , and then another called Capraria , which is infested by multitudes of huge lizards .
According to the same author , in sight of these islands is Ninguaria , which has received that name from its perpetual snows ; this island abounds also in fogs .
The one next to it is Canaria ; it contains vast multitudes of dogs of very large size , two of which were brought home to Juba : there are some traces of buildings to be seen here .
While all these islands abound in fruit and birds of every kind , this one produces in great numbers the date palm which bears the caryota , also pine nuts .
Honey too abounds here , and in the rivers papyrus , and the fish called silurus , are found .
These islands , however , are greatly annoyed by the putrefying bodies of monsters , which are constantly thrown up by the sea .
SOL THE COMPARATIVE DISTANCES OF PLACES ON THE FACE OF THE EARTH .
Having now fully described the earth , both without as well as within , it seems only proper that we should succinctly state the length and breadth of its various seas .
SOL Polybius has stated , that in a straight line from the Straits of Gades to the mouth of the Maeotis , it is a distance of three thousand four hundred and thirty-seven miles and a half , and that , starting from the same point , the distance in a straight line to Sicily is twelve hundred and fifty miles , from thence to Crete three hundred and seventy-five , to Rhodes one hundred and eighty-seven and a half , to the Chelidonian Islands the same distance , to Cyprus two hundred and twenty-five , and from thence to Seleucia Pieria , in Syria , one hundred and fifteen miles : the sum of all which distances amounts to two thousand three hundred and forty miles .
Agrippa estimates this same distance , in a straight line from the Straits of Gades to the Gulf of Issos , at three thousand three hundred and forty miles ; in which computation , however , I am not certain that there is not some error in the figures , seeing that the same author has stated that the distance from the Straits of Sicily to Alexandria is thirteen hundred and fifty miles .
Taking the whole length of the sea-line throughout the gulfs above-mentioned , and beginning at the same point , he makes it ten thousand and fifty-eight miles ; to which number Artemidorus has added seven hundred and fifty-six : the same author , including in his calculation the shores of the Maeotis , makes the whole distance seventeen thousand three hundred and ninety miles .
Such is the measurement given by men who have penetrated into distant countries , unaided by force of arms , and have , with a boldness that exhibits itself in the times of peace even , challenged , as it were , Fortune herself .
SOL I shall now proceed to compare the dimensions of the various parts of the earth , however great the difficulties which may arise from the discrepancy of the accounts given by various authors : the most convenient method , however , will be that of adding the breadth to the length .
Following this mode of reckoning , the dimensions of Europe will be eight thousand two hundred and ninety-four miles ; of Africa , to adopt a mean between all the various accounts given by authors , the length is three thousand seven hundred and ninety-four miles , while the breadth , so far as it is inhabited , in no part exceeds two hundred and fifty miles .
But , as Agrippa , including its deserts , makes it from Cyrenaica , a part of it , to the country of the Garamantes , so far as was then known , a further distance of nine hundred and ten miles , the entire length , added together , will make a distance of four thousand six hundred and eight miles .
The length of Asia is generally admitted to be six thousand three hundred and seventy-five miles , and the breadth , which ought , properly , to be reckoned from the Aethiopian Sea to Alexandria , near the river Nile , so as to run through Meroe and Syene , is eighteen hundred and seventy-five .
It appears then that Europe is greater than Asia , by a little less than one half of Asia , and greater than Africa by as much again of Africa and one-sixth .
If all these sums are added together , it will be clearly seen that Europe is one-third , and a little more than one-eighth part of one-third , Asia one-fourth and one-fourteenth part of one-fourth , and Africa , one-fifth and one-sixtieth part of one-fifth of the whole earth .
SOL DIVISION OF THE EARTH INTO PARALLELS AND SHADOWS OF EQUAL LENGTH .
To the above we shall add even another instance of ingenious discovery by the Greeks , and indeed of the most minute skilfulness ; that so nothing may be wanting to our investigation of the geographical divisions of the earth , and the various countries thereof which have been pointed out ; that it may be the better understood , too , what affinity , or relationship as it were , exists between one region and another , in respect to the length of their days and nights , and in which of them the shadows are of equal length , and the distance from the pole is the same .
I shall therefore give these particulars as well , and shall state the divisions of the whole earth in accordance with the various sections of the heavens .
The lines or segments which divide the world are many in number ; by our people they are known as " circuli " or circles , by the Greeks they are called " paralleli " or parallels .
SOL The first begins at that part of India which looks towards the south , and extends to Arabia and those who dwell upon the borders of the Red Sea .
It embraces the Gedrosi , the Carmanii , the Persae , the Elymaei , Parthyene , Aria , Susiane , Mesopotamia , Seleucia surnamed Babylonia , Arabia as far as Petra , Coele Syria , Pelusium , the lower parts of Egypt called the Chora of Alexandria , the maritime parts of Africa , all the cities of Cyrenaica , Thapsus , Adrumetum , Clupea , Carthage , Utica , the two Hippos , Numidia , the two Mauritanias , the Atlantic Sea , and the Pillars of Hercules .
Within the meridian of this parallel , on the middle day of the equinox , the pin of the dial , usually called the gnomon , if seven feet in length , throws a shadow at mid-day no more than four feet long : the longest day and night are fourteen equinoctial hours respectively , the shortest being only ten .
SOL The next circle or parallel begins with the western parts of India , and runs through the middle of Parthia , through Persepolis , the nearer parts of Persis , the nearer Arabia , Judaea , and the people who live near Mount Libanus , and it embraces Babylon , Idumaea , Samaria , Hierosolyma , Ascalon , Joppa , Caesarea in Phoenicia , Ptolemais , Sidon , Tyre , Berytus , Botrys , Tripolis , Byblus , Antiochia , Laodicea , Seleucia , the maritime parts of Cilicia , the southern parts of Cyprus , Crete , Lilybaion in Sicily , and the northern parts of Africa and Numidia .
In these regions , at the time of the equinox , a gnomon of thirty-five feet in length gives only a shadow twenty-four feet long ; and the longest day and night are respectively fourteen equinoctial hours , and one-fifth of an hour , in length .
SOL The third circle or parallel begins at the part of India which lies in the vicinity of Mount Imaiis , and runs through the Caspian Gates and the nearer parts of Media , Cataonia , Cappadocia , Taurus , Amanus , Issus , the Passes of Cilicia , Soli , Tarsus , Cyprus , Pisidia , Side in Pamphylia , Lycaonia , Patara in Lycia , Xanthus , Caunus , Rhodes , Cos , Halicarnassus , Cnidos , Doris , Chios , Delos , the middle of the Cyclades , Gythium , Malea , Argos , Laconia , Elis , Olympia , Messenia in Peloponnesus , Syracuse , Catina , the middle of Sicily , the southern parts of Sardinia , Carteia , and Gades .
A gnomon , one hundred inches in length , throws a shadow seventy-seven inches long ; the length of the longest day is fourteen equinoctial hours and a half , plus one thirtieth of an hour .
SOL Under the fourth circle or parallel lie those parts of India which are on the other side of the Imaiis , the southern parts of Cappadocia , Galatia , Mysia , Sardis , Smyrna , Sipylus , Mount Tmolus , Lydia , Caria , Ionia , Tralles , Colophon , Ephesus , Miletus , Chios , Samos , the Icarian Sea , the northern part of the Cyclades , Athens , Megara , Corinth , Sikyon , Achaia , Patrae , the Isthmus , Epirus , the northern parts of Sicily , the eastern parts of Gallia Narbonensis , and the sea-coast of Spain , from New Carthage westward .
In these districts a gnomon of twenty-one feet throws a shadow of sixteen feet in length ; the longest day contains fourteen equinoctial hours and two-thirds of an hour .
SOL Under the fifth zone are included , from the entrance to the Caspian Sea , the Bactri , Iberia , Armenia , Mysia , Phrygia , the Hellespont , Troas , Tenedos , Abydos , Scepsis , Ilium , Mount Ida , Cyzicus , Lampsacus , Sinope , Amisus , Heraclea in Pontus , Paphlagonia , Lemnos , Imbros , Thasos , Cassandria , Thessaly , Macedonia , Larissa , Amphipolis , Thessalonica , Pella , Edessa , Beroea , Pharsalia , Carystus , Euboea in Boeotia , Chalcis , Delphi , Acarnania , Aitolia , Apollonia , Brundisium , Tarentum , Thurii , Locri , Rhegium , the Lucani , Neapolis , Puteoli , the Tuscan sea , Corsica , the Balearic Islands , and the middle of Spain .
A gnomon , seven feet in length , in these countries gives a shadow of six feet , and the length of the day is fifteen equinoctial hours .
SOL The sixth division , in which Rome is included , embraces the Caspian nations , Caucasus , the northern parts of Armenia , Apollonia on the Rhyndacus , Nicomedia , Nicaea , Chalcedon , Byzantium , Lysimachia , the Chersonesus , the Gulf of Melas , Abdera , Samothracia , Maronea , Aenus , Bessica , Thracia , Maedica , Paeonia , the Illyrii , Dyrrhachium , Canusium , the extreme parts of Apulia , Campania , Etruria , Pisae , Luna , Luca , Genua , Liguria , Antipolis , Massilia , Narbo , Tarraco , the middle parts of Hispania Tarraconensis , and thence through Lusitania .
A gnomon of nine feet here throws a shadow eight feet long ; the greatest length of the day is fifteen equinoctial hours , plus one-ninth part of an hour , or , according to Nigidius , one-fifth .
SOL The seventh division begins on the other side of the Caspian Sea , and the line runs above Callatis , and through the Bosporus , the Borysthenes , Tomi , the back part of Thrace , the Triballi , the remainder of Illyricum , the Adriatic Sea , Aquileia , Altinum , Venetia , Vicetia , Patavium , Verona , Cremona , Ravenna , Ancona , Picenum , the Marsi , the Peligni , the Sabini , Umbria , Ariminum , Bononia , Placentia , Mediolanum , all the districts at the foot of the Apennines , and , beyond the Alps , Gallia Aquitanica , Vienne , the Pyrenaean range , and Celtiberia .
A gnomon thirty-five feet in length here throws a shadow of thirty-six feet , except in some parts of Venetia , where the shadow just equals the length of the gnomon ; the longest day is fifteen equinoctial hours , plus three-fifths of an hour .
SOL Thus far we have set forth the results of observations made by the ancients .
The remaining part of the earth has been divided , through the careful researches of those of more recent times , by three additional parallels .
The first runs from the Tanais through the Maeotis and the country of the Sarmatae , as far as the Borysthenes , and so through the Daci and part of Germany , and the Gallic provinces , as far as the shores of the ocean , the longest day being sixteen hours .
SOL The second parallel runs through the country of the Hyperborei and the island of Britannia , the longest day being seventeen hours in length .
SOL The last of all is the Scythian parallel , which runs from the Riphaean range to Thule , in which , as we have already stated , the year is divided into days and nights alternately , of six months' duration .
The same authors have also placed before the first parallel , which we have here given , two other parallels or circles ; the first running through the island of Meroe and the city of Ptolemais which was built on the Red Sea for the chase of the elephant ; where the longest day is twelve hours and a half in length ; and the second passing through Syene in Egypt , in which the longest day is thirteen hours in length .
The same authors have also added half an hour to each of the parallels , till they come to the last .
Thus far on the Geography of the earth .
SOL
