THE face of man has also been afflicted with new diseases , unknown in past years not only to Italy but also to almost the whole of Europe , and even then they did not spread all over Italy , or through Illyricum , the Gauls , and the Spains to any great extent , or in fact anywhere except in and around Rome .
Though they are painless and without danger to life , yet they are so disfiguring that any kind of death would be preferable .
SOL The most severe of these they called by a Greek name lichens ; in Latin , because it generally began on the chin , it was called mentagra , at first by way of a joke — so prone are many men to make a jest of the misfortunes of others — the name passing presently into common use .
The disease seized in many cases at least the whole of the face , with the eyes only unaffected , but passed down however also to the neck , chest and hands , covering the skin with a disfiguring , scaly eruption .
SOL This plague was unknown to our fathers and forefathers .
It first made its way into Italy in the middle of the principate of Tiberius Claudius Caesar , when a Roman knight of Perusia , a quaestor 's secretary , introduced the infection from Asia Minor , where he had taken up his duties .
Women were not liable to the disease , or slaves and the lower and middle classes , but the nobles were very much infected through the momentary contact of a kiss .
The scar left on many who had been hardy enough to endure the treatment was more unsightly than the disease , for caustics were the method employed , and the loathsome complaint broke out afresh unless the flesh was burnt through right to the bones .
There arrived from Egypt , the parent of such diseases , physicians who devoted all their attention to this complaint only , to their very great profit , since it is a fact that Manilius Cornutus , of praetorian rank and legate of the province of Aquitania , laid out two hundred thousand sesterces in getting himself treated for that disease .
On the other hand , it has more usually happened that new kinds of disease on their first appearance have been epidemic .
What can be found more marvellous than this , that some diseases should arise suddenly in a special part of the world , should attack special limbs of human beings or special ages , or even people of a special position in life , ( just as if a plague chose its victims ) , one children , another adults , one making the nobility especially liable , another the poor .
SOL It is noted in the Annals that it was in the censorship of Lucius Paullus and Quintus Marcius [ 164 BCE ] that there appeared for the first time in Italy the carbuncle , a disease peculiar to the province of Gallia Narbonensis .
There died of it in the same year as I compose my work two men of consular rank , Julius Rufus and Laecanius Bassus , the former through the ignorance of his physicians , who tried lancing ; the latter , however , through his own tearing out with a needle from his left thumb a splinter ( boil ) so small that it could scarcely be seen .
The carbuncle forms in the most hidden parts of the body , and usually as a red hardness under the tongue , like a pimple but blackish at the top , occasionally of a leaden colour , spreading into the flesh but without swelling , pain , irritation , or any other symptom than sleep , overcome by which the patient is carried off in three days .
Sometimes also the disease , bringing shivering , small pustules around the sore , and more rarely fever , has reached the oesophagus and pharynx , causing death very quickly .
SOL I have said that leprosy did not occur in Italy before the time of Pompeius Magnus , and that though the plague usually begins on the face , a kind of freckle on the tip of the nose , yet presently the skin dries up over all the body , covered with spots of various colours , and uneven , in places thick , in others thin , in others hard as with rough itch-scab , finally however going black , and pressing the flesh on to the bones , while the toes and fingers swell up .
This plague is native to Egypt .
When kings were attacked , it was a deadly thing for the inhabitants , because the tubs in the baths used to be prepared with warm human blood for its treatment .
This disease indeed quickly died out in Italy , as also did that called by the ancients gemursa , which appeared between the toes , the very name being now obsolete .
SOL This itself is a wonderful fact , that some diseases should disappear from among us while others remain endemic , as for example colum .
It was in the principate of Tiberius Caesar that this malady made its way into Italy .
Nobody suffered from it before the Emperor himself , and the citizens were greatly puzzled when they read in his edict , in which he begged to be excused because of illness , a name they had never heard before .
What are we to say that this means , what wrath of the gods ?
Were the recognised kinds of human disease , more than three hundred , too few , that they must be increased by new ones also to add to man 's fears ?
No fewer either are the troubles which man brings upon himself by his own agency .
These remedies that I record were those used by the ancients , Nature in a way making medicine herself , and their vogue was a long one .
Certainly the works of Hippocrates , who was the first to put together , and that with great distinction , rules for medical practice , we find full of references to herbs , equally so the works of Diocles of Carystus , who comes next after Hippocrates in time and reputation , likewise those of Praxagoras and Chrysippus , and then comes Erasistratus of Ceos ; while Herophilus indeed , although the founder of an over-subtle sect , we know recommended before all others this method of treatment .
But little by little experience , the most efficient teacher of all things , and in particular of medicine , degenerated into words and mere talk .
For it was more pleasant to sit in a lecture-room engaged in listening , than to go out into the wilds and search for the various plants at their proper season of the year .
SOL However , the ancient system of medicine remained unshaken , and claimed as its own considerable remains of its once acknowledged sphere , until , in the time of Pompeius Magnus , one Asclepiades , a professor of rhetoric , who found his gains in that profession too small , but had a brain brilliant enough for success in other professions , suddenly abandoned rhetoric for medicine .
A man who neither had practised it nor knew anything of remedies that call for sharp eyes and personal experience , but could attract by his eloquent and daily-practised oratory , was forced to reject all simples , and reducing the whole of medicine to the discovery of causes , made it a matter of guesswork .
He recognised especially five principles of general application : fasting from food , in other cases abstinence from wine , massage , walking , and the various kinds of carnage-rides .
Since every man realised that he could provide these things for himself , and since all applauded him as if the easiest things were also true , Asclepiades brought round to his view almost all the human race , just as if he had been sent as an apostle from heaven .
SOL He used , moreover , to attract men 's minds by the empty artifice of promising the sick , now wine , which he administered as opportunity occurred , while now he would prescribe cold water ; and since Herophilus had anticipated him in inquiring into the causes of diseases , and Cleophantus among the ancient physicians had brought to prominent notice the treatment by wine , he preferred , according to Marcus Varro , to win for himself the surname of ' cold-water giver .
' He devised also other attractive methods of treatment , such as suspended beds , so that by rocking them he could either relieve diseases or induce sleep ; again , he organized a system of hydropathy , which appeals to man 's greedy love of baths , and many other things pleasant and delightful to speak of , which won him a great professional reputation .
His fame was no less great when , on meeting the funeral cortege of a man unknown to him , he had him removed from the pyre and saved his life .
This incident I give lest any should think that it was on slight grounds that so violent a changes took place .
One thing alone moves me to anger : that one man , of a very superficial race , beginning with no resources , in order to increase his income suddenly gave to the human race rules for health , which however have subsequently been generally discarded .
The success of Asclepiades owed much to the many distressing and crude features of ancient medical treatment ; for instance , it was the custom to bury patients under coverings , and to promote perspiration by every possible means , now to roast the body before a fire , or continually to make them seek sunshine in our rainy city , nay throughout rainy imperial Italy : then for the first time were used hot-air baths , heated from below , treatment of infinite attractiveness .
Besides this he did away with the agonizing treatment employed in certain diseases ; for example in quinsy , which physicians used to treat by thrusting an instrument into the throat .
He rightly condemned emetics also , which were at that time employed unduly often .
He disapproved also of administering draughts that are injurious to the stomach , a criticism which is to a great extent a sound one .
That is why I always point out in the first place those remedies that are beneficial to the stomach .
SOL Above all Asclepiades was helped by Magian deceits , which prevailed to such a degree that they were strong enough to destroy confidence in all herbal remedies .
It was believed that by the plant aethiopis rivers and pools are dried up ; that by the touch of onothuris all things shut are opened ; that if achaemenis is thrown on the ranks of an enemy the lines turn their backs in panic ; that latace was wont to be given by the Persian king to his envoys , so that wherever they went they might enjoy an abundant supply of everything , with much similar nonsense .
Where then were these plants when the Cimbri and the Teutones raised their awful war yells , or when Lucullus with a few legions laid low so many kings of the Magi ?
Or why have Roman generals always made victualling a first care in their wars ?
Why did Caesar 's soldiers at Pharsalia feel hunger , if abundant plenty could have been given them by the happy property of a single plant ?
Would it not have been better for Scipio Aemilianus to open the gates of Carthage by a plant than to shake the defences for so many years with battering-rams ?
Let the Pomptine marshes be drained today by the plant merois , and much land be recovered for Italy near Rome .
But as for the medical prescription found in the same Democritus , to ensure the begetting of beautiful , good and lucky children , did it ever give such offspring to any Persian king ?
It would certainly be wonderful that the credulity of our forefathers , though it arose from most sound beginnings , reached the height it did , if in any matter man 's wit knew moderation , and I were not about to show , in the appropriate place , that this very system of medicine invented by Asclepiades has surpassed even Magian nonsense .
It is without exception the nature of the human mind that what begins with necessities is finally carried to excess .
I shall therefore go on to describe the omitted properties of the plants I dealt with in the preceding book , adding any other plants that my judgment will suggest .
SOL But of lichen , which is so disfiguring a disease , I shall amass from all sources a greater number of remedies , although not a few have been noticed already .
Remedies , then , are pounded plaintain , cinquefoil , root of asphodel in vinegar , shoots of the fig-tree boiled down in vinegar , and the root of hibiscus with bee-glue and strong vinegar boiled down to one quarter .
The affected part is also rubbed with pumice , as a preparation for the application of rumex root pounded in vinegar , or of mistletoe scum kneaded with lime .
A decoction too of tithymallus with resin is highly recommended ; the plant lichen however is considered a better remedy than all these , a fact which has given the plant its name .
It grows among rocks , has one broad leaf near the root , and one small stem with long leaves hanging down from it .
This plant removes also marks of scars ; it is pounded with honey .
There is another kind of lichen , entirely clinging , as does moss , to rocks ; this too is used by itself as a local application .
It also stops bleeding if the juice is dropped into wounds , and applied locally it is good for gatherings .
With honey also it cures jaundice , if the mouth and tongue are smeared with it .
Patients undergoing this treatment are ordered to bathe in salt water , to be rubbed with almond oil , and to abstain from garden vegetables .
To treat lichen is also used the root of thapsia pounded with honey .
SOL For the treatment of quinsy argemonia is taken in wine , hyssop is boiled down with figs and used as a gargle , peucedanum is used with rennet of the seal in equal parts , and proserpinaca pounded with sprats-brine and oil , or else held beneath the tongue .
Cinquefoil juice also , in doses of three cyathi .
This also used as gargle is good for all affections of the throat ; verbascum taken in water is specific for the tonsils .
SOL For scrofulous sores are prescribed plantain , the great celandine with honey and axle-grease , cinquefoil , root of persollata also with axle-grease — the application is covered with the plant 's leaves — artemisia also and the root of mandrake in water .
Broad-leaved sideritis dug up with a nail in the left hand is attached as an amulet , but the healed patients must guard it , lest herbalists wickedly plant it again , as I have said in certain places , and bring about a relapse , a danger against which I find those also are warned who have been cured by artemisia , and those too cured by plantain .
Damasonium , which is also called alisma , is gathered at the solstice and applied in rainwater to the sores , the leaf being crushed , or the root pounded , with axle-grease , but the application must be covered with a leaf from the same plant .
The same method is used for all pains in the neck and for tumours in any part of the body .
SOL The daisy grows in meadows .
It has a white flower , to a certain distance tinged with red .
It is held that an application of it is more efficacious if artemisia is added .
SOL Condurdum too is a plant blooming at the summer solstice , having a red flower .
Hung round the neck it is said to arrest scrofula ; the same is said of vervain with plantain .
All complaints of the fingers and specifically whitlows are successfully treated with cinquefoil .
SOL Of chest complaints quite the most distressing is cough .
Remedies for it are : root of panaces taken in sweet wine , juice of henbane ( even when there is spitting of blood ; the fumes too of bnrning henbane help the cough ) , scordotis also mixed with cress and dry resin pounded with honey — even by itself it makes expectoration easy — the greater centaury too , even when there is spitting of blood , for which complaint the juice of the plantain also is a remedy , three oboli of betony in water for spitting of pus or blood , root of persollata in doses of one drachma with eleven pine seeds , juice of peucedanum .
For pains in the chest acorum is a help , and for this reason it is a component of antidotes , a help too for cough are daucum and the Scythian herb .
The last is helpful for all chest complaints .
For cough and spitting of pus , the dose being three oboli in the same amount of raisin wine , the golden-flowered verbascum is a good remedy .
The potency of this plant is so great that beasts of burden that are not only suffering from cough but also broken-winded , are relieved by a draught , and the same I find is true of gentian .
The root of caccalia , soaked in wine and chewed , is good not only for cough but also for the throat .
A decoction of five sprays of hyssop , two of rue , and three figs , clears the chest and soothes the cough .
SOL Bechion is also called tussilago .
There are two kinds of it .
Wherever the wild kind grows it is believed that springs run under the surface , and the plant is considered a sign by the water-finders .
The leaves are rather larger than those of ivy , numbering five or seven , whitish underneath and pale on the upper side .
There is no stem , or flower , or seed , and the root is slender .
Some think it is the same as areion , and chamaeleuce under another name .
The smoke of this plant , dried with the root and burnt , is said to cure , if inhaled deeply through a reed , an inveterate cough , but the patient must take a sip of raisin wine at each inhalation .
SOL The second kind is called by some salvia , being like verbascum .
Finely ground , strained and warmed , it is taken in drink for a cough and pains in the side ; this prescription is also a remedy for scorpion stings and the poison of the sea dragon .
An embrocation also of the plant and oil is good for snakebites .
For cough , pains in the side and in the chest , a decoction is made of a bunch of hyssop and a quarter of a pound of honey , and verbascum with rue is taken in water , or powdered betony in hot water .
SOL The stomach is strengthened by the juice of scordotis , by centaury , by gentian taken in water , by plantain , either taken by itself in food or mixed with lentils or alica gruel .
Although betony in general lies heavy on the stomach , yet taken in drink , or if the leaves are chewed , it cures its troubles ; aristolochia also may be taken in drink or dry agaric chewed , neat wine being drunk after a while , and nymphaea heraclia or juice of pencedanum may be applied locally .
Psyllion is applied to inflammations , or pounded cotyledon with pearl-barley , or aizoum .
SOL Molon has a striated stalk , soft small leaves , and a root four fingers long , at the end of which is a head like that of garlic .
Some give it the name of syron .
In wine it cures stomach troubles and difficulty of breathing , as do the greater centaury in an electuary , plantain , its juice or as food , pounded betony , in the proportion of one pound to half an ounce of Attic honey and taken daily in hot water , and aristolochia or agaric in doses of three oboli taken in hot water or ass 's milk .
Cissanthemus is given in drink a for orthopnoea , for that and for asthma hyssop , while for pains in the liver , chest , and side , if there is no fever , the juice of peucedanum .
For spitting of blood also agaric is of help ; a victoriatus by weight is pounded and given in five cyathi of honey wine .
For this complaint amomum is equally good .
For liver complaints fresh teucria is specific , taken in the proportion of four drachmae to one hemina of vinegar and water , or betony , one drachma to three cyathi of hot water : the same amount of betony , in two cyathi of cold water , is given for heart affections .
The juice of cinquefoil is a remedy for affections of the liver and lungs , for spitting of blood , and for all internal blood impurities .
Both kinds of anagallis are wonderfully good for liver complaints .
Those who have eaten the plant called capnos ( smoke ) pass bile in their urine .
Acoron is a cure for liver diseases , and daucum for those of the chest and hypochondria .
SOL Ephedra , called by some anabasis , grows generally in wind-swept regions , climbs trees and hangs down from their branches .
It has no leaves , but numerous rush-like , jointed tufts , and a pale root .
For cough , asthma and colic it is given pounded in a dark-red , dry wine ; and it may be made into a gruel , to which wine should be added .
Another remedy is gentian , thoroughly pounded after being steeped the day before , the dose being a denarius by weight in three cyathi of wine .
SOL Geum has little roots , slender , blackish and with a pleasant smell .
It not only is a cure for pains in the chest or side , but also dispels indigestion , having besides a pleasant taste .
Vervain however is a cure for troubles of all the internal organs — sides , lungs , liver and chest .
But especially good for the lungs , and for those attacked by pulmonary tuberculosis , is the root of the plant consiligo , which I have said was but recently discovered .
It is a sovereign remedy indeed for lung trouble in pigs and in all cattle , even though it is merely placed across the ear-lap .
It ought to be drunk in water and held continuously in the mouth under the tongue .
Whether the part of this plant above ground is of any use is not yet agreed .
The kidneys are benefited by plantain taken as food , by betony taken in drink , and by agaric taken in drink as is prescribed for cough .
SOL Tripolion is found on coastal rocks washed by the waves , but neither in the sea nor on dry ground ; the leaf is that of isatis only thicker , the stem a span high and divided at the end , and the root white , thick , with a strong smell and a hot taste .
Cooked in emmer wheat it is prescribed for patients with liver complaint .
This plant is thought by some to be the same as polium , about which I have spoken in its proper place .
SOL Gromphaena , which has its leaves alternately green and rose-colour along the stem , taken .
in vinegar and water cures spitting of blood ; SOL and the plant malundrum cures troubles of the liver ; it grows among the corn and in meadows , with a strong scent and a white flower .
Its young shoot a is beaten up in old wine .
SOL The plant calcetum likewise is crushed with grape-skins and applied locally .
Betony root acts as a gentle emetic , administered as is hellebore , the dose being four drachmae taken in raisin wine or in honey wine .
The same is true of hyssop beaten up with honey , the result being better if cress or irio is taken first .
Another cure is molemouium in doses of one denarius by weight .
The milky juice of sillybum also , which thickens into a gum , is taken with honey , the dose being as above , and is excellent for carrying off bile .
On the other hand , vomiting is arrested by wild cummin , or by powdered betony , both taken in water .
Distaste for food is banished and indigestion dispelled by daucum , by powdered betony in hydromel , and by plantain boiled down as are greens .
Hemionion relieves hiccoughs , as also does aristolochia , and clymenus relieves asthma .
For pleurisy and pneumonia the greater centaury , and likewise hyssop , are taken in drink , and for pleurisy is taken juice of peucedanum .
SOL Halus also , which the Gauls call sil and the Veneti cotonea , cures pain in the side , as well as kidney troubles , sprains and ruptures .
It is like ox-eunila , and the tops are like those of thyme .
It is sweet and allays thirst .
Its roots are in some districts light , in others dark .
SOL The same good effect on pain in the sides is given by chamaerops , taken in wine , a plant with myrtle-like leaves around its twin stems , and with heads like those of a Greek rose .
Agaric , taken in drink as for cough , relieves sciatica and pains in the spine , as does powdered stoechas or betony , taken in hydromel .
SOL The greatest part however of man 's trouble is caused by the belly , the gratification of which is the life 's work of the majority of mankind .
For at one time it does not allow food to pass , at another it will not retain it , at another it does not take it , at another it does not digest it ; and so much have our customs degenerated that it is chiefly through his food that a man dies .
This , the most troublesome organ in the body , presses as does a creditor , making its demands several times a day .
It is for the belly 's sake especially that avarice is so acquisitive ; for its sake luxury uses spices , voyages are made to the Phasis , and the bottom of the ocean is explored .
Nobody , again , is led to consider how base an organ it is by the foulness of its completed work .
Therefore the tasks of medicine concerned with the belly are very numerous .
Looseness of the bowels is checked by a drachma dose of fresh scordotis beaten up with wine , or by the same quantity taken in a decoction , by polemonia in wine , which is also given for dysentery , by root of verbascum in doses of two fingers' size taken in water , the seed of nymphaea heraclia taken with wine , the upper root of xiphium , the dose being a drachma by weight , taken in vinegar , the seed of plantain beaten up in wine , plantain itself boiled in vinegar , or groats taken in plantain juice , also the plant boiled with lentils , or the plant dried , powdered and sprinkled in drink with parched and pounded poppies , juice of plantain injected or drunk , or betony in wine made warm with hot iron .
Betony is also administered in a dry wine for coeliac affections , for which hiberis also is applied locally in the way I have described .
For tenesmus the root of nymphaea heraclia is taken in wine , psyllium in water , or a decoction of root of acoron .
The juice of aizoum checks looseness of the bowels and dysentery , and expels round worms .
Root of symphytum taken in wine checks looseness of the bowels and dysentery , as does the root of daucum .
Leaves of aizoum thoroughly beaten up in wine arrest griping pains , as does dried alcima powdered and taken with wine .
SOL Astragalus has long leaves with many slanting incisions , around the root three or four stems covered with leaves , blossom like that of the hyacinthus , and roots that are hairy , matted , red and very hard .
It grows on stony ground that is exposed to sunshine and also to falls of snow , like the ground around Pheneus in Arcadia .
Its property is to brace the body .
Its root , taken in wine , checks looseness of the bowels , a result of which is that it is diuretic by forcing back their fluid , as most things do that check looseness .
It cures dysentery also when ground in light-red wine , but it is ground only with difficulty .
Fomentation with the same plant is very good for gum-boils .
It is gathered at the end of autumn , when it has lost its leaves , and is dried in the shade .
SOL Looseness of the bowels is also checked by both kinds of ladanum ; the one that grows in cornfields must be first crushed and passed through a sieve .
It is taken in hydromel , or in wine of a good vintage .
The name of ladon is given to a plant from which in Cyprus is made the ladanum that clings to the beards of goats ; a finer sort is prepared in Arabia .
Today a kind is also found in Syria and in Africa , called toxicum .
For they surround with pieces of wool strings fastened across a bow , and drag it over the plant ; to this wool adhere the dew-like tufts of ladanum .
I have said more about the plant in my section on unguents .
This ladanum has a very strong smell and is very hard to the touch .
In fact a great deal of earth sticks to it , while the most valued kind is clean , scented , soft , green and resinous .
Its nature is to soften , to dry , to mature abscesses , and to induce sleep .
It prevents the hair from falling off , and preserves its dark colour .
It is poured into the ears with hydromel or rose-oil .
With the addition of salt it cures scurf on the skin and running sores , and chronic cough when taken with storax ; it is also a very effective carminative .
SOL Looseness of the bowels is checked too by chondris , also called pseudodictamnum .
Hypocisthis , called by some orobothron , which is like an unripe pomegranate , grows as I have said under the cisthus , and from this fact derives its name .
Either kind of hypocisthis ( there are two ; the white and the red ) , dried in the shade and taken in dark-red , dry wine , checks looseness of the bowels .
The part used is the juice , which braces and dries , and it is the red kind that arrests better stomach catarrhs , spitting of blood when three oboli are taken with starch in drink , and dysentery when taken in drink or injected ; similarly vervain given in water , or in Aminnean wine if there is no fever , the dose being five spoonfuls added to three cyathi of wine .
SOL Layer also , which grows in streams , when preserved and boiled cures gripings , SOL potamogiton , however , taken in wine , cures dysentery as well and coeliac affections .
The latter is a plant with leaves like those of beet , only it is a smaller and more hairy plant , never rising more than a little above the surface of the water .
Only the leaves are used .
which have a cooling and bracing quality , being especially useful for bad legs , and , with honey or vinegar , for corroding ulcers .
The plant known to Castor under this name was different ; it had slender leaves like horsehair , a long , smooth stem , and grew in marshy districts .
With its root Castor used to cure scrofulous sores and indurations .
The crocodile has an antipathy a to potamogiton , so that crocodile hunters carry some of it on their persons .
Achillea too checks looseness of the bowels .
Statice also has the same properties , a plant that bears seven heads , like the heads of a rose , upon seven stems .
SOL Ceratia , a plant with one leaf , and a large , knotted root , taken in food cures sufferers from coeliac disease and dysentery .
Leontopodium , called by some leuceoron , by others dorypetron , by others thorybethron , is a plant the root of which , in doses of two denarii by weight added to hydromel , checks looseness of the bowels and carries off bile .
It grows on flat land with a thin soil .
Its seed , taken in drink , is said to cause nightmares .
Lagopus taken in wine , or in water if there is fever , checks looseness of the bowels .
It is also attached to the groin when there is swelling there .
It grows in cornfields .
Many recommend above all else for desperate cases of dysentery doses of a decoction in milk of the roots of cinquefoil , or aristolochia , a victoriatus by weight in three cyathi of wine .
When the prescriptions mentioned above are to be taken warm , it will be found best to heat them with red-hot iron .
On the other hand a drachma of the juice of the lesser centaury taken in a hemina of water with a little salt and vinegar purges the bowels and carries off bile ; the greater centaury dispels griping pains .
Betony acts as an aperient , four drachmae being added to nine cyathi of hydromel ; so also euphorbeum or agaric , in doses of two drachmae with a little salt , taken in water or in three oboli of honey wine .
Cyclamen too is an aperient , either taken in water or used as a suppository ; the same in its action is a suppository of chamaecissos .
A handful of hyssop , boiled down to one third with salt , or pounded in oxymel and salt , both carries off phlegm and expels worms from the intestines .
Root of peucedanum carries off both phlegm and bile .
SOL Both kinds of anagallis , taken in hydromel , are purgative , as is also epithymum , which is the blossom of the thyme like satureia .
The only difference is that this has a grass-green flower , the other thyme a white one .
Some call it hippopheos .
Less beneficial to the stomach , it causes vomitings , but dispels colic and flatulence .
As an electuary it is also taken with honey , and sometimes with iris , for chest troubles .
From four to six drachmae with honey and a little salt and vinegar move the bowels .
Others give a different account of epithymum : that it grows without a root , has a small head like a little hood , is red in colour and is dried in the shade , and a dose of half an acetabulum , taken in water , carries off phlegm and bile , acting as a gentle aperient .
SOL Nymphaea too in a dry wine loosens the bowels , as also does pycnocomon , which has leaves like rocket , but thicker and more acrid , a round root of a yellow colour and an earthy smell , a quadrangular stem , of moderate length and slender , and the blossom of basil .
It is found on stony ground .
Its root , taken in hydromel in doses of two denarii by weight , thoroughly purges the bowels of bile and phlegm .
A drachma of the seed , taken in wine , causes wild dreams .
Capnos trunca also carries away bile .
SOL Of polypodium , a plant called by Romans filicula , being like a fern ( filix ) , the root is medicinal , hairy , grass-green inside , as thick as the little finger , with indented edges so as to look like a polypus 's arms , of a sweetish taste , and to be found in stony soils or under old trees .
The juice is extracted from the root soaked in water , and chopped up fine the root itself is sprinkled on cabbage , beet , mallows and pickled fish , or else boiled with gruel to make a gentle aperient usable even in fever .
It brings away bile and phlegm , although injurious to the stomach .
Dried and reduced to powder it eats away polypus if pushed up the nostrils .
There is no flower and no seed .
SOL It is by relaxing the stomach that a scamonium too brings away bile and loosens the bowels , unless indeed to two oboli of it are added two drachmae of aloes .
This is the juice of a plant with many branches at the root , fleshy , three-cornered , pale leaves , and a thick , wet , nauseating root .
It grows in rich , pale soil .
Near the rising of the Dog-star a hollow is made in this root , so that the juice may collect in it automatically ; this is dried in the sun and worked into lozenges .
The root itself or the skin is also dried .
The kind most approved grows in the regions of Colophon , Mysia and Priene .
This is shiny , as like as possible to bull glue , spongy with very fine cracks , quickly melting , with a poisonous smell , gummy , becoming like milk at a touch of the tongue , extremely light , and turning white when dissolved .
This happens too with bastard scamonmm , which is made , generally in Judea , with flour of bitter vetch and juice of sea spurge , and even chokes those who take it .
The bastard kind is detected by the taste , for the genuine burns the tongue .
It is to be used when two years old , being of no use either before or after .
It has been prescribed by itself in water or in hydromel and salt , the dose being four oboli , but most effectively with aloes , though honey wine must be taken as soon as purging begins .
The root too is boiled down in vinegar to the consistency of honey , the decoction being applied to leprous sores , and with oil it is used as an ointment for the head when there is headache .
SOL Tithymallus is called ' milky plant ' by us Romans , sometimes ' goat lettuce .
' It is said that , if letters are traced on the body with its milk and then allowed to dry , on being sprinkled with ash the letters become visible .
And it is by this means , rather than by a letter , that some lovers have preferred to address unfaithful wives .
The kinds of it are many , the first being surnamed characias , which is also considered the male plant .
five or six branches , a cubit long , as thick as a finger , red and juicy ; the leaves at the root are very like those of the olive , and on the top of the stem is a head a like that of the rush .
It grows on rough ground near the sea .
The seed is gathered in autumn together with the head ; after being left to get dry in the sun it is pounded and stored away ; as to the juice , as soon as down begins to form on fruit , twigs are broken off , and juice therefrom is caught on meal of bitter vetch or on figs and left to get dry with them .
Five drops are enough to be caught on each fig , and it is reported that a dropsical patient on taking a fig has as many motions as the fig has caught drops of juice .
When the juice is being collected care must be taken that it does not touch the eyes .
A juice is also extracted from pounded leaves , but one less efficacious than the former .
A decoction too is made from the branches .
The seed is also used , boiled down with honey , to make purgative pills .
The seed is also inserted with wax into hollow teeth .
A decoction too of the root in wine or oil is used as a monthwash .
The juice is applied locally for lichen ; it is taken internally as a purge , being both an emetic and an aperient ; apart from this it is bad for the stomach .
Taken in drink with the addition of salt it brings away phlegm , but to bring away bile saltpetre must be added ; if it is desired that the purging shall be by stool , the drink should be vinegar and water ; if by vomiting , raisin wine or hydromel .
A moderate draught is made up with three oboli .
It is better taken on a fig , and after food .
The juice burns the throat slightly ; for it is of so heating a nature that , applied externally by itself to the body , it raises blisters as fire does , and so it is sometimes used as a cautery .
SOL The second kind of tithymallus is called myrtites by some , and caryites by others , having leaves like those of the myrtle , pointed and prickly , but larger , and growing like the first kind in rough ground .
Its heads are gathered when the barley is beginning to swell , dried in the shade for nine days and thoroughly dried in the sun .
The fruit does not ripen all together , but a part in the following year .
It is called the nut , and for this reason the Greeks have surnamed this tithymallus earyites .
It is gathered when the harvest is ready , washed , and then dried .
It is given with twice the amount of black poppy , the dose being one acetabulum altogether .
It is a less violent emetic than the preceding , as are also the others .
Some have given the leaf also in a similar dose , the nut however by itself in honey wine or raisin wine , or with sesame .
It carries off phlegm and bile by stool .
Sores in the mouth it cures , but for corroding ulcers in the mouth the leaf is eaten with honey .
SOL The third kind of tithymallus is called paralius or tithvmallis .
It has a round leaf , a stem a span high , reddish branches , and a white seed , which is gathered when the grape begins to form , and after being dried and pounded is taken in doses of one acetabulum as a purgative .
SOL The fourth kind of tithymallus is called helioscopios .
It has the leaves of purslane , and four or five small branches standing out from the root , which are reddish , half a foot high and full of juice .
This kind grows around towns , and has a white seed of which pigeons are very fond .
The name helioscopios has been given to this plant because it moves its heads round to follow the sun .
Bile it carries away by urine or stool when taken in doses of half an acetabulum in oxymel .
Its other uses are the same as those of characias .
SOL The fifth kind is called cyparittias , because its leaves are like those of cypress .
It has a double or triple stem , and grows in fiat country .
Its properties are the same as those of helioscopios or characias .
SOL The sixth kind is called by some platyphyllos , by others corymbites , and by others amygdalites from its likeness to the almond tree .
Its leaves are broader than those of any other .
It kills fish .
Root , leaves or juice are purgative if a dose of four drachmae is taken in honey wine or hydromel .
It is specific for carrying away morbid fluids .
SOL The seventh kind is surnamed dendroides , and is called by some cohios , and by others leptophyllos .
It grows among rocks , and is the most thickly headed of all the kinds .
It has very large , reddish stems , and an abundance of seed .
The properties are the same as those of characias .
SOL Apios ischas or raphanos agria spreads out on the ground two or three rush-like stalks of a reddish colour with leaves like those of rue .
The root is like that of an onion , but bigger , and this is the reason why some call it the wild radish .
Inside it has a white pap , outside , dark skins .
It grows in rough , hilly spots , sometimes also in grass land .
Dug up in spring , it is pounded and immersed in an earthen vessel .
After throwing away what floats on the surface they use the juice that remains as a purge and emetic , the dose being an obolus and a half in hydromel .
Prepared after this fashion a dose of an acetabulum is also given for dropsy .
The dried root powdered is also sprinkled in a draught .
They say that the upper part of it brings away the hues by vomiting , the lower part by stool .
SOL Colic is cured by any kind of panaces , by betony , except when the cause is indigestion , by the juice of peucedanum , which also , being carminative , dispels flatulence , by the root of acoron , or by daucum , if it is taken as a salad like lettuce .
Cyprian ladanum , taken in drink , is good for intestinal complaints , as also is powdered gentian , of the size of a bean , taken in warm water , or plantain taken in the morning , the dose being two spoonfuls with one of poppy in four cyathi of wine which is not old .
It is also given before going to sleep with the addition of soda or pearl barley , provided that it is long after the last meal .
For colitis a hemina of the juice is injected , even when fever is present .
SOL Agaric taken in drink , the dose being three oboli in one cyathus of old wine , is good for disorders of the spleen , as is the root in honey wine of all kinds of panaces , but best of all is teneria , dried and taken in drink by boiling down to one hemina a handful of it with three heminae of vinegar .
In vinegar it is also used as a liniment , or , if that cannot be borne , in figs or water .
Polemonia is taken in wine , or a drachma of betony in three cyathi of oxymel , or aristolochia as used for snake bite .
Argemonia , taken in food on seven consecutive days , is said to reduce the spleen , and so are two oboli of agaric in oxymel .
It is reduced also by the root of nymphaea heraclia taken in wine or by itself .
Cissanthemus , if a drachma is taken twice daily in two cyathi of white wine for forty days , is said to carry off the spleen gradually in the urine .
Useful too is a decoction of hyssop with fig , or of the root of lonchitis before it sheds its seed , while a decoction of root of peucedanum is good for both spleen and kidneys .
The spleen is reduced by the juice of acoron taken by the mouth — the roots are very useful for trouble of the hypochondria and groin — by the seed of clymenus taken in drink for thirty days , the dose being a denarius by weight in white wine , by powdered betony taken in honey and squill vinegar , and by root of lonchitis in water .
Teucrium is used as liniment , likewise scordium with wax , or agaric with powdered fenugreek .
SOL For diseases of the bladder and for the cure of stone , which causes as we have said the most severe torture , help is obtained from polemonia taken in wine , from agaric , from leaves or root of plantain taken in raisin wine , from betony as we prescribed it for the liver ; this last , taken in drink and used as liniment , is good for hernia and wonderfully effective for strangury .
Some recommend betony , vervain and millefolium , in equal parts and taken in water , as a sovereign remedy for stone .
It is certain that strangury is cured by dittany also , and by cinquefoil boiled down to one third in wine .
The latter preparation is very useful to be taken , and to be used locally as a liniment , by sufferers from intestinal hernia .
The upper part of the root of xiphilum also is diuretic ; it is given in water and applied locally as liniment for intestinal hernia in infants .
For bladder troubles the juice of peucedanum is applied locally , and psyllion is so applied for hernia and umbilical rupture in infants .
The two kinds of anagallis are diuretic , as is a decoction of root of acoron , or the root by itself pounded and taken in drink ; these are good for all troubles of the bladder , for stone both cotyledon and its root , and also , for all inflammations of the genitals , equal parts by weight of the stem , of the seed , and of myrrh .
Ebulum ground with its tender leaves and taken in wine expels stone , and applied locally cures complaints of the testicles .
Erigeron too with powdered frankincense and sweet wine cures inflammation of the testicles .
Root of symphytum used as liniment reduces intestinal hernia , and white hypocisthis is good for corroding ulcers of the genitals .
Artemisia too in sweet wine is given for stone and for strangury ; root of nymphaea heraclia in wine relieves pains of the bladder .
SOL The same property is to be found in crethmos , a plant very highly praised by Hippocrates .
It is also one of the wild plants that are eaten — at any rate in Callimachus the peasant Hecale puts it on the table — and a species of garden elate .
It has one stem a span high , and a hot seed , scented like that of libanotis , and round .
When dried it bursts , and has inside a white kernel , which some call cachrys .
The leaves are fleshy , and whitish like those of the olive only thicker , and salt to the taste ; there are three or four roots , of the thickness of a finger .
It grows in rocky places by the sea .
It is eaten , raw or boiled , with cabbage , and has a pleasant , aromatic taste ; it is also preserved in brine .
It is especially useful for strangury , the leaves , stem , or root being taken in wine .
The complexion also of the skin is improved by it , but too large a dose causes flatulence .
A decoction relaxes the bowels , brings away urine and humours from the kidneys , as does the powder of dried alcima taken in wine , and relieves strangury , more efficaciously however if daucum is added .
It is also good for the spleen , and is taken in drink for snake bites .
Phlegm or strangury in draught animals also is relieved if crethsnos is sprinkled over their barley .
SOL Anthyllion is very like the lentil , and taken in wine cures bladder troubles and arrests bleeding .
A second plant , anthyllis , is like chamaepitys , and has a purple flower , a heavy scent , and a root like that of endive .
It is even better treatment taken in oxymel for epilepsy .
SOL Cepaea is like purslane , but has a darker root , which is of no value .
It grows on sandy shores , and has a bitter taste .
Taken in wine with root of asparagus it is very good indeed for the bladder .
SOL The same properties are to be found in hypericon — some call it chamaepitys , others conssum — which has the stem of a garden vegetable , thin , reddish , and a cubit high .
The leaves are like those of rue and have a pungent smell .
The seed , which is black , is in a pod , and it ripens at the same time as barley .
This seed is of a bracing quality , checks diarrhoea and promotes urine ; it is taken with wine for bladder troubles .
SOL There is another hypericon , called by some caro , having a leaf like that of the tamarisk — it grows underneath it — but more fleshy and less red .
It is scented , more than a span high , with a sweet and rather pungent taste .
The seed is of a heating nature and therefore causes inflammation , but it is not injurious to the stomach ; it is particularly good for strangury , if the bladder is not ulcerated .
Taken in wine it is also good for pleurisy , SOL as moreover is callithrix for the bladder if beaten up with eummin and administered in white wine .
Vervain too if boiled down with the leaves to one third , or its root in warm honey wine , expels stone from the bladder , as does also perpressa , which grows near Arretium and in Illyricum ; it is taken in drink , boiled down in water from three heminae to one .
Trefoil , taken in wine , and chrysanthemum , have the same effect .
Stone is expelled also by anthemis , which has five small leaves growing from the root , two long stems and a rose-coloured flower .
The roots pounded by themselves a layer , raw .
SOL Silaus grows in running streams with gravelly bottoms ; a cubit high it resembles celery .
It is boiled as is an acid vegetable , and is very good for the bladder , which if it suffers from is cured by the root of panaces , a plant otherwise injurious to the bladder .
Stone is expelled by the wild apple , a pound of the root being boiled down to one half in a congius of wine — a hemina of it is taken daily for three days , the rest is taken in wine — by sea-nettle , by daucum , and by the seed of plantain in wine .
SOL The plant of Fulvius , beaten up with wine , is another remedy for stone .
It is one of the plants named after the discoverer , and is well known to botanists .
SOL Scordion is diuretic ; hyoscyamus reduces swollen testicles ; the genitals are effectively treated by juice of peucedanum , and by its seed in honey ; strangury by three-oboli doses of agaric in one cyathus of old wine , by two-drachmae doses of root of trefoil in wine , and by one-drachma doses of daucum or of its seed .
Sciatica is cured by pounded seed and leaves of erythrodanus , by panaces taken in drink and rubbed on the affected part , by polemonia , and by a decoction of the leaves of aristolochia .
Agaric indeed cures both the tendon called ' broad ' and pain in the shoulders , the dose being three oboli taken in one cyathus of old wine .
For sciatica cinquefoil is both taken in drink and applied , as is also a decoction of scammony with barley meal added .
The seed of either kind of hypericum is taken in wine .
Affections and chafings of the seat are cured very quickly by plantain , condylomata by cinquefoil ; if however these have already become callous , by cyclamen root in vinegar .
The blue anagallis pushes back prolapsus of the anus ; the red anagallis on the contrary makes it worse .
Cotyledon is wonderfully good treatment for condylomata and for piles ; so is , for swollen testicles , the application of root of acoron , pounded and boiled down in wine .
Cato says that those carrying on their persons Pontic wormwood never suffer from chafing between the thighs .
Other authorities add pennyroyal to the list of remedies ; this , gathered by a fasting man and tied behind him , prevents pains in the groin or relieves those which have begun already .
SOL Inguinalis (' groin-wort ') , called by some argemonion , a plant growing anywhere in briar patches , needs only to be held in the hand to be of benefit .
SOL Superficial abscess is cured by panaces in honey , plantain with salt , cinquefoil , root of persollata administered as for scrofula ; also by damasonium and by verbascum , pounded with its root , sprinkled with wine , wrapped round with its leaves , and heated , thus prepared , on embers , so that it may be applied hot .
Those with experience have assured us that it makes all the difference if , while the patient is fasting , the poultice is laid upon him by a maiden , herself fasting and naked , who must touch him with the back of her hand and say : ' Apollo tells us that a plague cannot grow more fiery in a patient if a naked maiden quench the fire ;' and with her hand so reversed she must repeat the formula three times , and both must spit on the ground three times .
Other cures are mandrake root in water , a decoction of scammony root with honey , sideritis crushed with stale grease , marruvium with stale axle-grease , or chrysippios — another plant named after its discoverer — with plump figs. SOL Nymphaea heraclia , as I have said , takes away altogether sexual desire ; a single draught of it does so for forty days ; sexual dreams too are prevented if it is taken in drink on an empty stomach and eaten with food .
Applied to the genitals the root also cheeks not only desire but also excessive accumulation of semen .
For this reason it is said to make flesh and to improve the voice .
Sexual desire is excited by the upper part of xiphium root given in wine as a draught ; also by the plant called eremuos agrios and by ormenos agrios crushed with pearl barley .
SOL But very high on the list of wonders is the plant orchis , or serapias , which has the leaves of leek , a stem a span high , and a purple flower .
The root has two tubers , like testicles , so that the larger , or , as some put it , the thinner , taken in water excites desire ; the smaller , or softer , taken in goat 's milk checks it .
Some say that this orchis has leaves like those of the squill , only smoother and smaller , and a prickly stem .
The roots cure sores in the mouth and phlegm on the chest ; taken in wine they are constipating .
Satyrion is a sexual stimulant .
There are two kinds of it : one with longer leaves than those of the olive , a stem four fingers high , purple blossom , and a double root shaped like human testicles , which swells and subsides again in alternate years .
The other kind has the further name of satyrios orehis , and is thought to be female .
It is distinguished from the former kind by the spaces between the joints , by its more branchy , bushy shape , also by its root 's being like a phallus .
The plant is generally found near the sea .
SOL This latter kind , if applied with pearl barley or by itself after being pounded , relieves swellings and affections of the privy parts .
The root of the former kind , taken in the milk of a farmyard sheep , causes erections ; taken in water , however , it makes them subside .
SOL The Greeks speak of a satyrion that has leaves like those of the lily , but red , smaller , and springing from the ground not more than three in number , a smooth , bare stem a cubit high , and a double root , the lower , and larger , part favouring the conception of males , the upper , and smaller , the conception of females .
Yet another kind of satyrion they call erythraicon , saying that its seed is like that of the vitex , but larger , smooth and hard ; that the root is covered with a red rind , and contains a a white substance with a sweetish taste , and that the plant is generally found in hilly country .
They tell us that sexual desire is aroused if the root is merely held in the hand , a stronger passion , however , if it is taken in a dry wine , that rams also and he-goats are given it in drink when they are too sluggish , and that it is given to stallions from Sarmatia when they are too fatigued in copulation because of prolonged labour ; this condition is called prosedamum .
The effects of the plant can be neutralized by doses of hydromel or lettuce .
The Greeks indeed always , when they wish to indicate this aphrodisiac nature of a plant , use the name satyrion , so applying it to crataegis , thelygonon , and arrenogonon , the seeds of which resemble testicles .
Again , those carrying on their persons the pith of tithymallus branches are said to become thereby more excited sexually .
The remarks on this subject made by Theophrastus generally a weighty authority , are fabulous .
He says that the lust to have intercourse seventy times in succession has been given by the touch of a certain plant whose name and kind he has not mentioned .
SOL Tied to the part as an amulet , sideritis reduces varicose veins and does its work without pain .
Gout was a rarer disease within the memory , not only of our fathers and grandfathers , but also of our own generation .
It is also itself a foreign complaint ; had it existed in Italy in early times it would have received a Latin name .
It must not be considered incurable , for many cases have been cured without treatment , and yet more with it .
Useful remedies are roots of panaces with raisins , juice of henbane with meal , or the seed of henbane , scordion in vinegar , hiberis as already prescribed , vervain beaten up with axle-grease , and the root of cyclamen , a decoction of which is also good for chilblains .
Cooling applications for gouty pains are made from xiphion root , psyllion seed , hemlock with litharge or axle-grease , and aizotim for the first onset of red , that is hot , gout .
Good for either kind however is erigeron with axle-grease , plantain leaves beaten up with a little salt added , and argemonia pounded with honey .
Vervain too may be applied as a remedy — or the feet may be soaked in the water in which it has been boiled , SOL or the lappago that is like anagallis , but more branchy and leafy , and with a strong smell .
This kind of plant is called mollugo ; like it , but with rougher leaves , is asperugo .
The juice of the former a is taken daily , the dose being one denarius by weight in two cyathi of wine .
SOL The sovereign remedy , however , for this complaint is phycos the lassion , or seaweed , which is like lettuce , and is used as a ground-colour for the purple of the murex ; it is sovereign , not for gout only , but for all diseases of the joints , if applied before it becomes dry .
There are moreover three kinds of it : one is broad , the second is rather long and inclining to red , and the third , which has curly leaves , is used in Crete to dye cloth .
They have all the same medicinal uses .
Nicander gave these too in wine for snakebite .
A further remedy is the seed , soaked in water , of the plant I have called psyllion : one hemina of such seed is compounded with two spoonfuls of Colophonian resin and one spoonful of frankincense .
Another highly valued remedy is made from leaves of mandrake pounded with pearl barley .
When however ankles swell , water-mud kneaded with oil makes a wonderfully good plaster ; for the joints the juice of the smaller centaury is very beneficial , as it is also for the sinews ; beneficial too is centauris .
For the sinews running across the shoulder blades , for the shoulders , for the backbone and the loins , a good remedy is betony , taken as prescribed for the liver ; for the joints an application of cinquefoil , leaves of mandrake with pearl barley , or its root pounded fresh with wild cucumber or boiled down in water ; for chaps on the toes the root of polypodium ; for the joints juice of henbane with axle-grease , the decocted juice of amomum , a decoction too of centunculus , or fresh moss soaked in water and bound round the part until the water dries off , and also root of lappa boaria taken in wine .
Cyclamen boiled down in water is a good remedy for chilblains and for all other affections caused by cold ; for chilblains cotyledon too with axle-grease , leaves of batrachion and the juice of epithymum .
Corns are extracted from the feet by ladanum mixed with beaver-oil , and by vervain in wine .
SOL Having now finished the complaints that affect separate limbs I shall go on to describe those that attack the whole body .
Of remedies that are generally useful I learn that the best is dodecatheum , to be given in drink , a plant I have already described ; next the roots of all kinds of panaces , especially good for long illnesses , and the seed is used for intestinal complaints ; for general bodily pains however juice of seordion and also of betony , which taken in drink is specific for removing a leaden colour of the skin and restoring a more pleasing complexion .
SOL Geranion is called by some myrris and by others myrtidas .
It resembles hemlock , but with smaller leaves and shorter in the stem , round , and of a pleasant taste and smell .
In this way it is described by our Roman authorities ; but Greeks say that it has leaves a little lighter in colour than those of the mallow , thin stems , and downy , with branches at interval and two spans long ; on them are the leaves , among which on the tips of the stems are miniature heads of cranes .
A second kind has leaves like those of anemone , which are marked with rather long incisions , and a round root like an apple , sweet , and very beneficial to convalescents .
The last seems to be the true geranion .
It is taken in drink for consumption twice a day in doses of one drachma in three cyathi of wine ; the same prescription is good for flatulence , and eaten raw the plant has the same effect .
The juice of the root is good for ear trouble ; for opisthotonic tetanus four-drachmae doses of seed are taken in drink with pepper and myrrh .
Consumption is cured too by drinking plantain juice , and by plantain itself boiled and taken as food .
Eaten with salt and oil on waking from sleep in the morning it is very refreshing .
It is also given every other day to those who we say are wasting away , but to consumptives we give betony made up with honey into an electuary of the size of a bean , or agarie in raisin wine in two-oboli doses , or daucum with the greater centaury in wine .
Cases of phagedaena , a word meaning bulimia as well as rodent ulcer , are treated by tithymallus with sesame .
SOL Of the maladies that affect the whole body sleeplessness is the most common .
As remedies for it are recommended panaces , clymenos , aristolochia — by the smell or by bathing the head — aizoum , that is houseleek , wrapped in black cloth and placed under the pillow without the knowledge of the patient .
Onothera also , that is onear , is soporific although exhilarating in wine , having leaves like those of the almond tree , rose-coloured blossom , a bushy shape and a long root , which when dried smells of wine , and given in their drink soothes even wild beasts .
Indigestion causing nausea is relieved by betony ; it also if taken in drink after dinner promotes digestion ; in doses of one drachma by weight in three cyathi of oxymel it also removes the after-effects of drink , as does agaric too taken in hot water after food .
Betony is said to cure paralysis and so does hiberis as prescribed previously .
It is also good for numbness of the limbs ; so also is argemonia , by removing all symptoms indicating that surgical treatment ( i.e. venesection ) may be necessary .
SOL Epilepsy is cured by the root of the panaces .
I have called heraclion taken in drink with seal 's rennet ; three quarters of the mixture must be panaces .
Other cures are plantain in drink , doses of one drachma of betony or three oboli of agaric in oxymel , leaves of cinquefoil in water , and also archezostis , but the last must be taken in drink for a year .
Other cures are dried root of baccar crushed to powder and taken in hot water in doses of three cyathi with one of coriander , pounded centunculus in vinegar or honey or hot water , vervain taken in wine , three crushed berries of hyssop taken in water for sixteen days , equal quantities of peucedanum and seal 's rennet taken in drink , crushed leaves of cinquefoil taken in wine for thirty days , powdered betony in doses of three denarii by weight with a cyathus of squill vinegar and an ounce of Attic honey , scammony in doses of two oboli with four drachmae of beaver-oil .
SOL The chills of fever are relieved by agaric taken in hot water , tertian fevers by sideritis with oil , by crushed ladanum , a plant found in grain fields , by plantain in hydromel taken in two-drachma doses within two hours before a paroxysm , juice of its root soaked or pounded , or by the root itself beaten up in water heated with hot iron .
Some physicians have prescribed doses of three roots in three cyathi of water , changing three to four if the fever is quartan .
If one takes , when bugloss is withering , the pith out of a stem and says that he does it to free so and so from fever , attaching to the patient seven leaves before a paroxysm begins , he is freed , it is said , from the fever .
Another remedy is betony in doses of one drachma in three cyathi of hydromel , or agaric , especially in fevers attended with violent shivers .
Some have prescribed doses of three cinquefoil leaves for tertians , of four for quartans , and of more for the other fevers ; others prescribe for all three oboli with pepper in hydromel .
Vervain in wine indeed is a remedy for fever even of beasts of burden , but for tertians the plant must be cut at the third joint , and for quartans at the fourth .
For quartans and feverish shivers is taken in drink the seed of either kind of hypericum , powdered betony , which checks all shiverings , and panaces also , which is of such a heating nature that those about to travel through snow are recommended to take it in drink and to be rubbed with it .
Violent chills are also checked by aristolochia .
SOL Phrenitis is cured by sleep , which will be induced by pouring on the head an infusion of peucedanum in vinegar , or the juice of either anagallis .
On the other hand it is difficult to awaken sufferers from lethargus ; this is done by touching the nostrils with euphorbeum in vinegar , or with the juice of peucedanum .
For delirium betony is taken in drink .
Carbuncles are made to burst by panaces , and cured by powdered betony in water , or by cabbage and frankincense with frequent draughts of hot water ; or the ash from a burning coal extinguished in the patient 's presence may be picked up with a finger and applied .
Other remedies are pounded plantain and tithymallus characites .
SOL Remedies for dropsy are : panaces ; plantain as food , after dry bread without any drink ; two-drachma doses of betony in two cyathi of wine or honey wine ; agaric , or lonchitis seed , two spoonfuls for a dose taken in water ; psyllion in wine ; juice of either anagallis ; root of cotyledon in honey wine ; root of fresh ebulum , shaken only and not washed , a two-finger pinch for a dose , taken in an emma of old wine and hot water ; root of trefoil in wine , two drachmae for a dose ; the tithymallus called platyphyllon ; seed of the hypericum known as caros ; acte , which some identify with ebulum , the root , if there is no fever , being crushed in three cyathi of wine , or the seed being taken in dark wine ; vervain also , a good handful being boiled down in water to one half .
The most efficacious remedy however is believed to be the juice of chamaeacte .
An of phlegm is relieved by plantain , by cyclamen root in honey , and by pounded leaves of ebulum in old wine .
An application of the last cures boa also , an eruption of red pimples , and the juice of strychnos applied as liniment cures itch .
SOL Erysipelas is treated with aizoum , pounded leaves of hemlock , and root of mandrake — it is cut into slices as is cucumber , hung first over must , then in smoke , and finally pounded taken in wine or vinegar .
It is beneficial too to foment with myrtle wine , or to use as an ointment two ounces of mint with one ounce of native sulphur beaten np together in vinegar , or soot mixed with vinegar .
There are several kinds of erysipelas , among them one called zoster , which goes round the patient 's waist , and is fatal if the circle becomes quite complete .
Remedies are : plantain with Cimolian chalk , penstereos by itself and the root of persollata ; as remedies for the creeping forms can be used root of cotyledon with honey wine , aizoum , and the juice of linozostis with vinegar .
SOL Root of polypodinm made up into liniment is a remedy for dislocations , and the pain and swelling are taken away by seed of psyllion , plantain leaves beaten up with a little salt , ground seed of verbascum boiled in wine , and hemlock with axle-grease .
The leaves of ephemeron are applied in the form of liniment to tumours and swellings that are still able to be dispersed .
SOL The most striking symptom of jaundice is the effect upon the eyes ; the bile penetrates even between the membranes , thin and close together as they are .
Hippocrates says that if jaundice supervenes from the seventh day of a fever it is a fatal symptom .
I however know of recoveries even from this desperate condition .
But cases of jaundice occur without fever , and can be overcome by the greater centaury , taken in drink as I have prescribed , by betony , by three-oboli doses of agaric in a cyathns of old wine , and by three-oboli doses of vervain leaves taken for four days in a hemina of warmed wine .
The quickest remedy however is juice of cinquefoil taken in doses of three cyathi with salt and honey .
Three-drachmae doses of root of cyclamen are taken in drink while the patient is in a warm place protected from chilly draughts — the medicine induces sweats full of gall — and good is done by leaves of tussilago in water , by seed of linozostis of either kind sprinkled in drink or boiled down with wormwood or chick peas , by hyssop berries taken with water , by the herb lichen , the patient during the treatment abstaining from all other vegetables , by polythrix administered in wine , and by struthion in honey wine .
SOL A common complaint , affecting any part of the body , but especially an inconvenient part , is what are called boils , sometimes a fatal malady after surgical operations .
Pounded leaves of pycnocomon with pearl barley are a remedy if the boil has not yet come to a head .
Boils are also dispersed by applications of leaves of ephedron .
SOL Fistulas also form in any part of the body through the careless use of the surgeon 's knife .
The lesser centaury , if suppositories made from it are inserted with boiled honey , is a help ; so is plantain juice poured into them , cinquefoil with salt and honey , ladanum with beaver-oil , and cotyledon with deer 's marrow warmed and applied ; the pith of verbascum root , cut as slender as a suppository , is inserted into the fistula , or there may be used root of aristolochia or juice of tithymallus .
SOL Gatherings and inflammations are cured by an application of argemonia leaves , all indurations and gatherings by vervain , or by cinquefoil boiled down in vinegar , by leaves or root of verbascum , by an application of hyssop in wine , by fomenting with a decoction of acoron root , and by aizotim ; for bruises , indurations , and for pitted sores in the flesh the remedy is illecebra .
All foreign bodies buried in the flesh may be extracted by leaves of tussilago , by daucum , or by seed of leontopodium beaten up in water with pearl barley .
To suppurations are applied leaves , or seed , of pycnocomon beaten up with pearl barley , likewise orchis .
For affections of the bones a very efficacious cure is said to be an application of satyrion root , and for corroding sores and gatherings of all kinds an application of seaweed used while it is still wet .
Root of alcima too disperses gatherings .
SOL Burns are healed by plantain , and by arctium so well that no scars are seen .
A decoction in water of crushed arctium leaves is used as liniment for burns , and so are cyclamen roots with aizoum , and the plant itself of the hypericum I have called corissum .
SOL Good for sinews and joints are plantain beaten up with salt and argemonia pounded in honey .
Juice of peucedanum is rubbed all over those suffering from spasms or tetanus .
For indurations of the sinews juice of aegilops is used as liniment , and for pains of the sinews erigeron ( or epithymum ) is so used in vinegar .
Spasms and opisthotonic tetanus are benefited by thorough rubbing with seed of the hypericum known as caros , and this seed also benefits if taken in drink .
Sinews even when severed are said to be healed by phrynion , beaten up or chewed , if it is applied immediately .
Spasms , palsy , and opisthotonic tetanus are treated by root of alcima taken in hydromel .
So taken it also warms rigors .
SOL Haemorrhage is checked by the red seed of the plant paeonia — the root also is styptic — but by clymenus when blood is discharged from the mouth or nostrils , or when it flows from the bowels or the uterus ; by lysimachia too taken in drink , or applied as liniment , or inserted into the nostrils , also by plantain seed , by cinquefoil taken in drink and applied , by hemlock seed beaten up in water and inserted into the nostrils should there be epistaxis , by aizoum and by root of astragalus .
Ischaemon too and achillia check bleeding .
SOL Equisaetum , called hippuris by the Greeks , and found fault with by me when I discussed meadow land , it is in fact hair of the earth resembling horse hair — reduces the spleen of runners if as much as the pot will hold is boiled down to one third in new earthenware , and taken in drink for three days in doses of one hemina .
There must be abstinence from fatty foods for at least one day previously .
The Greeks hold various views about this plant ; some under the same name speak of a dark plant with leaves like those of the pine , assuring us that , so wonderful is its nature , its mere touch stanches a patient 's bleeding ; some call it hippuris , others ephedron , others anabasis .
Their account is that it grows near trees , which it climbs , and hangs down in many dark , rush-like hairs as if from a horse 's tail ; that its little branches are jointed , and its leaves few , slender and small ; that the seed is round , resembling that of coriander , that its root is ligneous , and that it grows mostly in plantations .
Its property is to brace the body .
Its juice , kept in the nostrils , checks haemorrhage therefrom , and it also checks looseness of the bowels .
Taken in a sweet wine , in doses of three cyathi , it is good for dysentery , promotes passing of urine , and cures cough and orthopnoea , ruptures also and spreading sores .
The leaves are taken in drink for complaints of the bowels and bladder ; the plant itself reduces intestinal hernia .
The Greeks recognise yet another hippuris , which has shorter , softer and paler hairs , making a very useful application in vinegar for sciatica , and also for cuts , as it stanches the flow of blood .
Nymphaea also beaten up is applied to wounds from blows , and peucedanum with cypress seed is taken in drink if blood is brought up through the mouth or flows from the lower passages .
Sideritis has such a powerful effect that if bandaged to a gladiator 's wound , however recent , it stops the bleeding , as does also the ash or cinders of fennel-giant , though more efficacious still is the fungus that grows about its root .
SOL For epistaxis however hemlock seed also beaten up in water and inserted into the nostrils is held to be efficacious , and so is stephanomelis in water .
Ground betony taken in goat 's milk checks haemorrhage from the breasts , as does crushed plantain .
The juice of the latter is given to those who vomit blood .
For sporadic bleeding however is recommended an application of persollata root with stale axle-grease .
SOL For ruptures , sprains , and falls from a height remedies are : the greater centaury , gentian root beaten up or boiled down , or its juice , betony , and especially when the lesion is caused by straining the voice or sides , panaces , scordium , aristolochia in drink , agaric also for bruises and falls , the dose being two oboli taken in three cyathi of honey wine or , if there is fever , in hydromel , the verbascum with the golden flower , root of acoron , all the kinds of aizoum ; the most efficacious preparation however being the juice of the greater aizoum , the broth too of symphytum or a decoction of the root , raw daucos , erysithales — the flower is yellow , the leaves those of the acanthus — taken in wine , chamaerops also and irio in soup , or any preparation of plantain , likewise .
SOL Sulla the dictator perished from phthiriasis ; in the very blood of the patient creatures come to life that will eat up his flesh ?
The disease is combated by rubbing the whole body with juice of the taminian grape , or with hellebore juice and oil .
Taminian grapes indeed boiled down in vinegar remove this nuisance even from garments .
SOL Ulcers are of many kinds , and the methods of treatment are many .
To running sores is applied in warmed wine the root of any kind of panaces .
A specific for drying them is the herb I have chironia ; beaten up with honey it opens hard swellings , and affords relief to desperate cases of spreading ulcers ; it is diluted with wine and combined with flower of copper , and seed , flower or root may be used indiscriminately .
This plant with pearl barley is also good for old wounds , so too is heraclion siderion , apollinaris , psyllium and tragacantha .
Scordotis with honey cleanses them ; its powder consumes morbid excrescences of flesh , if sprinkled on them by itself .
Polemonia heals ulcers that are called malignant ; the greater centaury , whether sprinkled or applied as liniment , the tuft also of the lesser centaury , boiled down or beaten up , cleanses and thoroughly heals even chronic ulcers .
The seed pods of clymenus are applied to fresh wounds .
From gentian too is made a liniment for spreading ulcers ; the pounded root is boiled down in water to the consistency of honey or the juice may be used ; from gentian is made a lycium for wounds .
Lysimachia is good treatment for fresh wounds , and plantain for ulcers of all kinds , especially for those of old men and babies .
It is better when softened by fire , and with wax-salve cleanses the thickened lips of ulcers and arrests corrosive sores .
The pounded plant when applied should be covered with its own leaves .
Suppurations , gatherings and pitted ulcers are also dried up by chelidonia , wounds are healed so well that it is even used instead of spodium .
It is also applied with axle-grease to sores that are already despaired of .
Dittany taken in drink forces out arrows ; an external application causes to fall out other kinds of weapons — the dose for a draught is an obolus of the leaves in a cyathus of water — and bastard dittany is almost as effective ; both too disperse suppurations .
Aristolochia also eats away festering ulcers , with honey cleanses those that are foul , expels worms , the callosities also that form in ulcers and all things embedded in the flesh , especially with resin arrows and bone splinters ; but the pits of ulcers it fills up by itself or with the addition of iris .
For fresh wounds it is used in vinegar ; for chronic ulcers vervain is used , or cinquefoil with salt and honey .
The roots of persollata are applied to fresh wounds that have been inflicted by iron , and the leaves to old wounds , axle-grease being added to both with a covering of the plant 's leaves .
Other applications are damasonium , used as for serofula , and the leaves of verbascum in vinegar or wine .
Peristereos is good for all kinds of ulcers , even when hard and festering .
Running ulcers are cured by root of nymphaea heraclia , also by the root of cyclamen , by itself , in vinegar , or with honey .
This last is also excellent for fatty tumours , as is hyssop for running ulcers , and peucedanum also , which when used for fresh wounds is so powerful as to exfoliate bones .
The two kinds of anagallis also have this property , and check fluxes and the sores called nomae , being useful for fresh wounds , but especially for those on the flesh of the aged .
Abscesses and foul ulcers may be treated with fresh leaves of mandrake and wax-salve , wounds with its root and honey or oil , or with hemlock added to wheat and neat wine .
For herpes also , nomae and festering ulcers , aizoum may be used , as may erigeron for verminous sores , for fresh wounds root of astragalus , and for chronic ulcers either kind of hypocisthis , which cleanses them .
The seed of leontopodium , beaten up in water and applied with pearl barley , extracts the heads of arrows , as does also the seed of pycnocomon .
The juice of tithymallus characites heals gangrenes , phagedaenic sores and purulent ulcers , as does a decoction of the branches with pearl barley and oil ; the roots of orchis moreover with honey cure even malignant sores , healing wounds without further addition , and whether dry or freshly gathered .
Onothera heals ulcers that are becoming virulent .
The Scythians treat wounds with scythice .
For carcinoma argemonia applied with honey is very efficacious .
For ulcers prematurely healed root of asphodel , boiled down as I have said , beaten up with pearl barley and applied , is good ; but apollinaris is good for any kind of sore , and root of astragalus , beaten to powder , for ulcers that are running , and so is callithrix boiled down in water ; specific however for sores caused by footwear is vervain , crushed lysimachia also , and dried nymphaea reduced to powder .
But when these last have become chronic polythrix proves more useful .
SOL Polycnemon is like ox cunila , and its seed resembles that of pennyroyal ; it has a wood-like stem with many joints , and its clusters are scented , with a pungent but sweet smell .
When chewed it is applied to cuts made by iron , but is taken off on the fifth day .
Symphyton very quickly causes a scar to form , as also does sideritis , which is applied with honey .
The seed and leaves of verbascum , boiled down in wine and beaten up , bring away everything embedded in the flesh , as do mandrake leaves with pearl barley , or cyclamen roots with honey .
Trixago leaves crushed in oil are applied especially to spreading ulcers as is also seaweed beaten up in honey ; betony , with the addition of salt , is used for carcinoma and chronic pustules on the neck .
SOL Warts are removed by argemonia in vinegar , by root of batrachium , which also brings away scabrous nails , and by an application of the leaves or juice of either kind of linozostis .
All kinds of tithymallus remove all kinds of warts , hangnails , and pimples on the face .
Ladanum smoothes away scars and restores the colour .
A traveller who has artemisia and elelisphacus tied on him does not , they say , feel any fatigue .
SOL For diseases of women a very good general remedy is the black seed , taken in hydromel , of the plant paeonia ; its root also has the same property .
An emmenagogue is seed of panaces with wormwood , and a sudorific emmenagogue is scordotis , taken internally or applied locally .
Betony in doses of one drachma to three cyathi of wine is taken for all uterine affections , and for those that result from childbirth .
Excessive menstruation is checked by an application of achillia or a sitz bath in a decoction of it .
To the breasts is applied henbane seed in wine — but to the uterus henbane root in a plaster ... and also chelidonia .
A pessary of panaces roots brings away retarded afterbirth or the dead foetus .
The uterus is purged by panaces , taken by itself in wine , and by a pessary of it with honey .
Polemonia taken in wine forces out the afterbirth , and the fumes of it when burnt correct the uterus .
Juice of the lesser centaury taken in drink or used as a fomentation is an emmenagogue , and the root of the greater centaury , used in the same ways , is good for uterine pains , while if it is scraped and applied as a pessary it brings away a dead foetus .
Plantain is applied as a pessary in wool for pain in the uterus ; for hysterical suffocation it is taken in drink .
But it is dittany that is of the greatest efficacy ; it is an emmenagogue , and forces out the foetus when dead or lying transversely — an obolus of the leaves is taken in water — being so efficacious in these respects that it is not even introduced into the bedroom of pregnant women .
Not only when taken in drink but also when used as embrocation or a fumigation it has medicinal power .
Bastard dittany is very nearly as good , but for an emmenagogue it is boiled down with neat wine , the dose being one denarius by weight .
Very many however are the ways in which aristolochia does good , for it is an emmenagogue , hastens the afterbirth , and brings away a dead foetus ; myrrh and pepper being added it is taken in drink or used as a pessary .
It also checks prolapsus of the uterus , whether used as fomentation , fumigation or pessary , especially the slender aristolochia .
Hysterical suffocations and delayed menstruation are relieved by agaric taken in doses of three oboli to a cyathus of old wine , by a pessary of peristereos in fresh lard , and by antirrhinon with rose oil and honey .
The root also of Thessalian nymphaea cures uterine pain when used as a pessary ; taken in dark-red wine it checks excessive menstruation ; on the contrary , root of cyclamen is an emmenagogue if taken in drink or a used as a pessary ; a sits bath in the decoction is a remedy for troubles of the bladder .
Cissanthemos taken in drink forces out the afterbirth and heals the uterus .
The upper part of the root of xiphium is an emmenagogue , the dose being a drachma taken in vinegar .
Peucedanum calms hysterical suffocations by its smell when burnt ; leucorrhoea is purged especially by psyllion in doses of one drachma to three cyathi of water .
Seed of mandrake taken in drink purges the uterus ; a pessary of its juice is an enimenagogue and brings away a dead foetus .
Excessive menstruation again is checked by mandrake seed with live sulphur ; on the contrary , menstruation is promoted by batrachium , taken in drink or food , a plant which , though when raw it has , as I have said , a burning taste , is made agreeable , when cooked , by salt , oil and cummin .
Daucum in drink readily acts as an emmenagogue , and readily brings away the afterbirth ; fumigation with ladanum corrects the uterus , and the plant is applied locally for pain there and ulceration .
Scammony taken in drink or used as a pessary forces out a dead foetus .
Either kind of hypericum , used as a pessary , acts as an eminenagogue ; pre-eminently so , however , as Hippocrates believes , does crethmos , the seed , or the skin of the root , being taken in wine ; it also brings away the afterbirth , and taken in water is helpful in hysterical suffocations , as is the root of geranion , which is specific for the afterbirth and for inflation of the uterus .
Hippuris , taken in drink and applied as a pessary , purges the uterus , as does polygonus taken in drink .
The root of alcima too is an emmenagogue , leaves of plantain a violent one , as is also agaric in hydromel .
Artemisia beaten up is good for the uterus , applied as a pessary in iris oil or with fig or with myrrh .
Its root taken in drink purges the uterus so violently that it expels a dead foetus .
A sitz bath of a decoction of the branches is an enimenagogue , and also hastens the afterbirth ; so too acts a drachma of the leaves taken in drink .
For all the same purposes the leaves are also good when merely applied with barley meal to the base of the abdomen .
Acoron too is beneficial for internal diseases of women , and so is either kind of conyza , and also crethmos .
The two kinds of anthyllis , taken in wine , are very useful for uterine troubles , for griping pains there , and for delay of the afterbirth .
Callithrix used for fomentations is healing to the uterus , removes albugo on the head , and beaten up in oil stains the hair .
Geranion taken in a white wine , and hypocisthis taken in a red , check excessive menstruation .
Hyssop relieves hysteria .
The root of vervain , taken in water , is a sovereign remedy for all troubles at or after childbirth .
Some physicians prescribe pencedanum in dark-red wine mixed with crushed cypress seed .
But seed of psyllixun , boiled in water and taken while still warm , relieves all fluxes of the uterus .
Symphyton beaten up in dark-red wine promotes menstruation .
Scordotis taken in drink hastens delivery , the dose being a drachma of the juice in four cyathi of hydromel .
Leaves of dittany given in water are excellent for this purpose .
It is an established fact that a single obolus of them by weight immediately brings away the foetus , even if it is dead in the uterus , without any distress to the lying-in woman .
Good in a similar way is bastard dittany , but slower , also cyclamen used as an amulet , cissanthemos taken in drink , and powdered betony in hydromel .
SOL Arsenogonon and thelygonon are plants bearing clusters like the flowers of the olive , but paler , and a white seed like that of the poppy .
It is said that thelygonon , taken in drink , causes the conception of a female ; arsenogonon differs from it in having a seed like that of the olive , but in no other way ; taken in drink this plant is said to cause the generation of males , if we care to believe it .
Some hold that both plants are like basil , but that the seed of arsenogonon is double , resembling testicles .
SOL For affections of the breasts the aizoum I have called a digitillum is an outstanding remedy .
Erigeron in raisin wine makes the breasts richer in milk , as does soncum boiled with emmer wheat ; the plant called mastos , however , is applied as liniment .
The hairy affection appearing on the breasts at childbirth , brick-red spots on the face , and other skin troubles , are removed by gentian , or by an application of nymphaea heraclia , and all kinds of spots by root of cyclamen .
The grains of caccalia , mixed with melted wax , smooth the face , taking away the wrinkles , and all facial troubles are removed by root of acoron .
SOL Lycium juice dyes the hair flaxen ; hypericum , also called corissum , dyes it black , as does ophrys , a plant like indented cabbage , but with only two leaves .
Polemonia , too , boiled down in oil , imparts a black colour .
Depilatories I myself indeed regard as a woman 's cosmetic , but now today men also use them .
But very efficacious is held to be archezostis , as also the tithymalli , the juice being applied frequently with oil either in the sun or when the hairs have been pulled out .
Hyssop in oil heals the itch in quadrupeds , and sideritis is specific for the quinsy in swine .
But I must go on to describe the remaining kinds of plants .
SOL
