IN the previous part of my work I have often indeed refuted the fraudulent lies of the Magi , whenever the subject and the occasion required it , and I shall continue to expose them .
In a few respects , however , the theme deserves to be enlarged upon , were it only because the most fraudulent of arts has held complete sway throughout the world for many ages .
Nobody should be surprised at the greatness of its influence , since alone of the arts it has embraced three others that hold supreme dominion over the human mind , and made them subject to itself alone .
Nobody will doubt that it first arose from medicine , and that professing to promote health it insidiously advanced under the disguise of a higher and holier system ; that to the most seductive and welcome promises it added the powers of religion , about which even today the human race is quite in the dark ; that again meeting with success it made a further addition of astrology , because there is nobody who is not eager to learn his destiny , or who does not believe that the truest account of it is that gained by watching the skies .
Accordingly , holding men 's emotions in a threefold bond , magic rose to such a height that even today it has sway over a great part of mankind , and in the East commands the Kings of Kings .
SOL Without doubt magic arose in Persia with Zoroaster .
On this our authorities are agreed , but whether he was the only one of that name , or whether there was also another afterwards , is not clear .
Eudoxus , who wished magic to be acknowledged as the noblest and most useful of the schools of philosophy , declared that this Zoroaster lived six thousand years before Plato 's death , and Aristotle agrees with him .
Hermippus , a most studious writer about every aspect of magic , and an exponent of two million verses composed by Zoroaster , added summaries too to his rolls , and gave Agonaces as the teacher by whom he said that he had been instructed , assigning to the man himself a date five thousand years before the Trojan War .
What especially is surprising is the survival , through so long a period , of the craft and its tradition ; treatises are wanting , and besides there is no line of distinguished or continuous successors to keep alive their memory .
For how few know anything , even by hearsay , of those who alone have left their names but without other memorial — Apusorus and Zaratus of Media , Marmarus and Arabantiphocus of Babylon , or Tarmoendas of Assyria ?
The most surprising thing , however , is the complete silence of Homer about magic in his poem on the Trojan War , and yet so much of his work in the wanderings of Ulysses is so occupied with it that it alone forms the backbone of the whole work , if indeed they put a magical interpretation upon the Proteus episode in Homer and the songs of the Sirens , and especially upon the episode of Circe and of the calling up of the dead from Hades , of which magic is the sole theme .
And in later times nobody has explained how ever it reached Telmesus , a city given up to superstition , or when it passed over to the Thessalian matrons , whose surname a was long proverbial in our part of the world , although magic was a craft repugnant to the Thessalian people , who were content , at any rate in the Trojan period , with the medicines of Chiron , and with the War God as the only wielder of the thunderbolt ?
I am indeed surprised that the people over whom Achilles once ruled had a reputation for magic so lasting that actually Menander , a man with an unrivalled gift for sound literary taste , gave the name ' Thessala ' to his comedy , which deals fully with the tricks of the women for calling down the moon .
I would believe that Orpheus was the first to carry the craft to his near neighbours , and that his superstition grew from medicine , if the whole of Thrace , the home of Orpheus , had not been untainted by magic .
The first man , so far as I can discover , to write a still-extant treatise on magic was Osthanes , who accompanied the Persian King Xerxes in his invasion of Greece , and sowed what I may call the seeds of this monstrous craft , infecting the whole world by the way at every stage of their travels .
A little before Osthanes , the more careful inquirers place another Zoroaster , a native of Proconnesus .
One thing is certain ; it was this Osthanes who chiefly roused among the Greek peoples not so much an eager appetite for his science as a sheer mania .
And yet I notice that of old , in fact almost always , the highest literary distinction and renown have been sought from that science .
Certainly Pythagoras , Empedocles , Democritus and Plato went overseas to learn it , going into exile rather than on a journey , taught it openly on their return , and considered it one of their most treasured secrets .
Democritus expounded Apollobex the Copt and Dardanus the Phoenician , entering the latter 's tomb to obtain his works and basing his own on their doctrines .
That these were accepted by any human beings and transmitted by memory is the most extraordinary phenomenon in history ; so utterly are they lacking in credibility and decency that those who like the other works of Democritus deny that the magical books are his .
But it is all to no purpose , for it is certain that Democritus especially instilled into men 's minds the sweets of magic .
Another extraordinary thing is that both these arts , medicine I mean and magic , flourished together , Democritus expounding magic in the same age as Hippocrates expounded medicine , about the time of the Peloponnesian War , which was waged in Greece from the three-hundredth year of our city .
There is yet another branch of magic , derived from Moses , Jannes [ an Egyptian magician ] , Lotapes [ Iotape / Yahweh ] , and the Jews , but living many thousand years after Zoroaster .
So much more recent is the branch in Cyprus .
In the time too of Alexander the Great , no slight addition was made to the influence of the profession by a second Osthanes , who , honoured by his attendance on Alexander , travelled certainly without the slightest doubt all over the world .
SOL Among Italian tribes also there still certainly exist traces of magic in the Twelve Tables , as is proved by my own and the other evidence set forth in an earlier Book ?
It was not until the 657th year of the City [ 97BC ] that in the consulship of Gnaeus Cornelius Lentulus and Publius Licinius Crassus there was passed a resolution of the Senate forbidding human sacrifice ; so that down to that date it is manifest that such abominable rites were practised .
SOL Magic certainly found a home in the two Gallic provinces , and that down to living memory .
For the principate of Tiberius Caesar did away with their Druids and this tribe of seers and medicine men .
But why should I speak of these things when the craft has even crossed the Ocean and reached the empty voids of Nature ?
Even today Britain practises magic in awe , with such grand ritual that it might seem that she gave it to the Persians .
So universal is the cult of magic throughout the world .
although its nations disagree or are unknown to each other .
It is beyond calculation how great is the debt owed to the Romans , who swept away the monstrous rites , in which to kill a man was the highest religious duty and for him to be eaten a passport to health .
SOL As Osthanes said , there are several forms of magic ; he professes to divine from water , globes , air , stars , lamps , basins and axes , and by many other methods , and besides to converse with ghosts and those in the underworld .
All of these in our generation the Emperor Nero discovered to be lies and frauds .
In fact his passion for the lyre and tragic song was no greater than his passion for magic ; his elevation to the greatest height of human fortune aroused desire in the vicious depths of his mind ; his greatest wish was to issue commands to the gods , and he could rise to no nobler ambition .
No other of the arts ever had a more enthusiastic patron .
Every means were his to gratify his desire — wealth , strength , aptitude for learning — and what else did the world not allow !
That the craft is a fraud there could be no greater or more indisputable proof than that Nero abandoned it ; but would that he had consulted about his suspicions the powers of Hell and any other gods whatsoever , instead of entrusting these researches to pimps and harlots .
Of a surety no ceremony , outlandish and savage though the rites may be , would not have been gentler than Nero 's thoughts ; more cruelly behaving than any did Nero thus fill our Rome with ghosts .
SOL The Magi have certain means of evasion ; for example that the gods neither obey those with freckles nor are seen by them .
Was this perhaps their objection to Nero ?
But his body was without blemish ; he was free to choose the fixed days , could easily obtain perfectly black sheep , and as for human sacrifice , he took the greatest delight in it .
Mithridates the Magus had come to him bringing a retinue for the Annenian triumph over himself , thereby laying a heavy burden on the provinces .
He had refused to travel by sea , for the Magi hold it sin to spit into the sea or wrong that element by other necessary functions of mortal creatures .
He had brought Magi with him , had initiated Nero into their banquets ; yet the man giving him a kingdom was unable to acquire from him the magic art .
Therefore let us be convinced by this that magic is detestable , vain , and idle ; and though it has what I might call shadows of truth , their power comes from the art of the poisoner , not of the Magi .
One might well ask what were the lies of the old Magi , when as a youth I saw Apion the grammarian , who told me that the herb cynocephalia , called in Egypt osiritis , was an instrument of divination and a protection from all kinds of sorcery , but if it were uprooted altogether the digger would die at once , and that he had called up ghosts to inquire from Homer his native country and the name of his parents , but did not dare to repeat the answers which he said were given .
SOL It should be unique evidence of fraud that they look upon the mole of all living creatures with the greatest awe , although it is cursed by Nature with so many defects , being permanently blind , sunk in other darkness also , and resembling the buried dead .
In no entrails is placed such faith ; to no creature do they attribute more supernatural properties ; so that if anyone eats its heart , fresh and still beating , they promise powers of divination and of foretelling the issue of matters in hand .
They declare that a tooth , extracted from a living mole and attached as an amulet , cures toothache .
The rest of their beliefs about this animal I will relate in the appropriate places .
But of all they say nothing will be found more likely than that the mole is an antidote for the bite of the shrewmouse , seeing that an antidote for it , as I have said , is even earth that has been depressed by cart wheels .
SOL Toothache is also cured , the Magi tell us , by the ash of the burnt heads without any flesh of dogs that have died of madness , which must be dropped in cyprus oil through the ear on the side where the pain is ; also by the left eye-tooth of a dog , the aching tooth being scraped round with it ; by one of the vertebrae of the draco or of the enhydris , the serpent being a white male .
With this eye-tooth they serape all round the painful one , or they make an amulet of two upper teeth , when the pain is in the upper jaw , using lower teeth for the lower jaw .
With its fat they rub hunters of the crocodile .
They also scrape teeth with bones extracted from the forehead of a lizard at a full moon , without their touching the earth .
They rinse the mouth with a decoction of dogs' teeth in wine , boiled down to one-half .
The ash of these teeth with honey helps children who are slow in teething .
A dentifrice also is made with the same ingredients .
Hollow teeth are stuffed with the ash of mouse dung or with dried lizards' liver .
A snake 's heart , eaten or worn as an amulet , is considered efficacious .
There are among them some who recommend a mouse to be chewed up twice a month to prevent aches .
Earthworms , boiled down in oil and poured into the ear on the side where there is pain , afford relief .
These also , reduced to ash and plugged into decayed teeth , force them to fall out easily , and applied to sound teeth relieve any pain in them .
They should be burnt , however , in an earthen pot .
They also benefit if boiled down in squill vinegar with the root of a mulberry tree , so as to make a wash for the teeth .
The maggot also , which is found on the plant called Venus' Bath , plugged into hollow teeth , is wonderfully good .
But they fall out at the touch of the cabbage caterpillar , and the bugs from the mallow are poured into the ears with rose oil .
The little grains of sand , that are found in the horns of snails , if put into hollow teeth , free them at once from pain .
Empty snail shells , reduced to ash and myrrh added , are good for the gums , as is the ash of a serpent burnt with salt in an earthen pot , poured with rose oil into the opposite ear , or the slough of a snake with oil and pitch-pine resin warmed and poured into either ear — some add frankincense and rose oil — and if put into hollow teeth it also makes them fall out without trouble .
I think it an idle talc that white snakes cast their slough about the rising of the Dog-star , since the casting has been seen in Italy before the rising , and in warm regions it is much less probable for sloughing to be so late .
But they say that this slough , even when dry , combined with wax forces out teeth very quickly .
A snake 's tooth also , worn as an amulet , relieves toothache .
There are some who think that a spider also is beneficial , the animal itself , caught with the left hand , beaten up in rose oil , and poured into the ear on the side of the pain .
The little bones of hens have been kept hanging on the wall of a room with the gullet intact ; if a tooth is touched , or the gum scraped , and the bone thrown away , they assure us that the pain at once disappears , as it does if a raven 's dung , wrapped in wool , is worn as an amulet , or if sparrows' dung is warmed with oil and poured into the ear nearer the pain .
This however causes unbearable itching , and so it is better to rub the part with vinegar and the ash of a sparrow 's nestlings burnt on twigs .
SOL They assert that the taste in the mouth is made agreeable if the teeth are rubbed with the ash of burnt mice mixed with honey ; some add fennel root .
If the teeth are picked with a vulture 's feather , they make the breath sour .
To pick them with a porcupine 's quill conduces to their firmness .
Sores on the tongue or lips are healed by a decoction of swallows in honey wine ; chaps on them by goose grease or hen 's grease , by oesypum with gall nut , by white webs of spiders , or by the small webs spun on rafters .
If the mouth has been scalded by over-hot things , bitch 's milk will give an immediate cure .
SOL Spots on the face are removed by oesypum with Corsican honey , which is considered the most acrid ; scurf on the skin of the face by the same with rose oil on a piece of fleece ; some add also butter .
If however there is psoriasis , dog 's gall is applied to the spots , which are first pricked with a needle ; to livid spots and bruises rams' or sheep 's lungs are applied hot and cut into thin slices , or else pigeon 's dung .
The skin of the face is preserved by goose grease or hen 's .
To lichen is also applied mouse dung in vinegar , or ash of the hedgehog in oil ; for this treatment they prescribe that the face should first be fomented with soda and vinegar .
Facial troubles are also removed by the ash with honey of the broad but small snails that are found everywhere .
The ash indeed of all snails , such is its detergent property , thickens and warms ; for that reason it is an ingredient of caustic preparations and used as a liniment for itch , leprous sores , and freckles .
I find also that there are ants called Herculanean , which beaten up and with the addition of a little salt cure facial troubles .
The buprestis is a creature rarely found in Italy , and very similar to a long-legged beetle .
Oxen at pasture are very apt not to see it — hence too its name — and should it be swallowed it causes such inflammation on reaching the gall that it bursts the animal .
This insect applied with he-goat suet removes lichen from the face by its corrosive property , as I have already said .
Vulture 's blood , beaten up with cedar resin and the root of the white chamaeleon , a plant I have already mentioned , and covered with a cabbage leaf , heals leprous sores , as do the legs of locusts beaten up with he-goat suet .
Pimples are cured by poultry fat kneaded with onion .
Very useful too for the face is honey in which bees have died , but the best thing for clearing the complexion and removing wrinkles is swan 's fat .
Branded marks are removed by pigeon 's dung in vinegar .
SOL I find that a heavy cold clears up if the sufferer kisses a mule 's muzzle .
Pain in the uvula and in the throat is relieved by the dung , dried in shade , of lambs that have not yet eaten grass , uvula pain by applying the juice of a snail transfixed by a needle , so that the snail itself may be hung up in the smoke , and by the ash of swallows with honey .
This also gives relief to affections of the tonsils .
Gargling with ewe 's milk is a help to tonsils and throat , as is a multipede beaten up , gargling with pigeon 's dung and raisin wine , and also an external application of it with dried fig and soda .
Sore throat and a running cold are relieved by snails — they should be boiled unwashed and with only the earth taken off crushed and given to drink in raisin wine ; some hold that the snails of Astypalaea are the most efficacious — by their ash , and also by rubbing with a cricket or if anybody touches the tonsils with hands that have crushed a cricket .
SOL In quinsy very speedy relief is afforded by goose gall with elaterium and honey , by the brain of an owl , and by the ash of a swallow taken in hot water .
The last prescription is on the authority of the poet Ovid .
But more efficacious for all ailments for which swallows are prescribed are the young of wild swallows , which are recognised by the shape of their nests , but by far the most efficacious are the young of sand martins , for so are called the swallows that build their nests in holes on river banks .
Many hold that a young swallow of any kind should be eaten to banish the fear of quinsy for a whole year .
They wring their necks , burn them blood and all in a vessel , and give the ash with bread or in drink .
Some add also to the prescription an equal quantity of weasel ash .
These preparations are given daily in drink for scrofula and for epilepsy .
Preserved in salt also swallows are taken for quinsy in drachma doses , for which complaint their nest also , taken in drink , is said to be a cure .
It is thought that an application of millipedes is very efficacious for quinsy ; some think that twenty , beaten up in a hemina of hydromel , should be given through a reed , because if the teeth are touched the draught is thought to be useless .
They also tell us that a mouse , well boiled with vervain , makes a broth that is a remedy , as does a thong of dog leather wrapped three times round the neck , or dove 's dung thoroughly mixed with wine and oil .
For neck-sinews and opisthotonus a twig of agnus castus taken from the nest of a kite and worn as an amulet , is said to help , for ulcerated scrofula a weasel 's blood , or the weasel itself boiled down in wine , but it is not applied to sores that have been lanced .
They say also that eating weasel in food has the same effect , or the animal burned over twigs and the ash mixed with axle grease .
A green lizard is attached as an amulet ; after thirty days the weasel should be changed for another .
Some keep a weasel 's heart in a small silver vessel for scrofula in woman or man .
An ointment is made of snails pounded with their shells , especially those that cling to shrubs , or there is applied the ash of asps with bull suet , snake 's fat mixed with oil , or an ointment of snake 's ash in oil or with wax .
To eat also the middle part of a snake after cutting off either end is good for scrofula , as is to take in drink the ash of this middle burnt in new earthenware , with much greater benefit if the snakes have been killed between two wheel-ruts .
They recommend also the application of a cricket dug up with its earth , also the application of dove 's dung by itself , or with barley meal or oatmeal in vinegar , or of mole ash with honey .
Some make an ointment of a mole 's liver crushed between the hands , and do not wash it off for three days .
They also assure us that the right foot of the animal is a remedy for scrofula .
Others cut off the head , pound it with the earth of a mole-hill , work into lozenges in a pewter box , and use for all swellings , for what are called apostemata , and for affections of the neck ; during the treatment the eating of pork is forbidden .
There are earth beetles like ticks that are called ' bulls' — a name given because of their little horns — and by some ' earth lice .
' These too throw up earth that is applied to scrofulous and similar sores , and also to gouty parts , not being washed off for three days .
The efficacy of this treatment lasts for a year .
To these creatures are assigned all the properties I have mentioned when speaking of crickets .
Some also use for this purpose the earth thrown up by ants , others tie as an amulet as many earth worms as there are sores , which dry up as the worms shrivel .
Others about the time of the Dog-star cut off , as I have said , the ends of a viper , then burn the middle part and give a three-finger pinch of the ash to be taken in drink for thrice seven days , treating scrofulous sores in this way ; some however do so by tying round them a linen thread by which a viper has been suspended by the neck until it died .
They also use millipedes with a fourth part of terebinth resin , a medicament which they recommend for the treatment of all apostemata .
SOL Good treatment for pains in the shoulder is weasel ash and wax .
Rubbing with ants' eggs prevents hair in the armpits of children , and dealers , to delay growth of downy hair on adolescents , use blood that comes from the testicles of lambs when they are castrated .
Applications of this blood after the hair has been pulled out also do away with the rank smell of the armpits .
SOL Praecordia is a comprehensive name we use for the vital organs of the human body .
When any one of them is in pain , the application of a sucking puppy pressed close to that part is said to transfer the malady to it ; they add that , if the organs of the puppy are taken out and washed with wine , by the diseased aspect of those organs can be detected the source of the patient 's pain ; but the burial of an animal so used is an essential part of the ritual .
Those puppies too that we call Melitaean relieve stomachache if laid frequently across the abdomen .
That the disease is transferred to the puppy is seen by its sickening , usually even by its death .
Lung complaints are also cured by mice , especially African ; they are skinned , boiled down in oil and salt , and taken in food .
The same preparation is also a cure for expectoration of pus or blood .
SOL The best medicine , however , for the stomach is a diet of snails .
They should be gently boiled in water , African snails by preference , with their bodies whole , then with nothing added grilled over a coal fire , and so taken in wine and garum .
Recently this treatment has been found to benefit very many sufferers , who are also careful that the number of the snails taken is odd .
Their rank juice , however , makes the breath foul .
Pounded without their shells and taken in water they are also good for the spitting of blood .
The most prized snails are the African , especially those of Iol , those of Astypalaea , moderate sized Sicilian ( for the large are hard , and without juice ) , and those of the Baliaric islands , called cavaticae because they breed in caverns .
Those from the islands and of Capreae are prized , but none whether preserved or fresh make pleasant eating .
River snails and white snails have a rank taste ; wood snails are not good for the stomach , relaxing the bowels , and so with all small snails .
On the other hand sea snails are rather beneficial for the stomach , but of the prized snails the most efficacious for stomach-ache are said to be all that are swallowed alive in vinegar .
Moreover , there are some snails called άκέρατοι , which are broad , and breed in many places ; of these I shall speak in the appropriate places .
The skin of the crop of poultry , sprinkled into the drink when dried , or roasted if fresh , relieves chest catarrhs and moist coughs .
A cough is relieved by pounded raw snails swallowed in three cyathi of tepid water , running colds also by a piece of dog skin put round any finger .
Partridge broth acts as a tonic on the stomach .
SOL Pains in the liver are treated by the wild weasel , or its liver , taken in food , also by a ferret roasted as is a sucking pig ; asthma by thrice seven multipedes , soaked in Attic honey and sucked through a reed , for every vessel they touch they turn black .
Some roast a sextarius of them in a pan until they turn white , then they mix them with honey and recommend giving them in warm water .
Snails in food have been given to those subject to fainting , aberration of the mind , or vertigo , a dose being one snail in three cyathi of raisin wine , pounded with the shell , warmed , and taken in drink for nine days at most ; some have given one on the first day , two on the next , three on the third , two on the fourth , and one on the fifth .
This treatment is also good for asthma and abscesses .
Some hold that there is a creature like a locust , but without wings , called trixallis in Greek but without a name in Latin ; some , and not a few authorities , maintain that it is what is called in Latin gryllus ( cricket ) ; twenty of these they recommend to be roasted and taken in honey wine for orthopnoea .
A cure for spitting of blood are snails , if the patient pours protropum on them unwashed , or if he boils them down in seawater , and takes them in food , or if pounded with their shells they are taken with protropum ; these preparations also cure a cough .
Specific for abscesses is honey in which bees have died .
For coughing up blood a vulture 's lung burnt over vine wood , with half as much pomegranate blossom and the same quantity of quince blossom and of lilies , taken morning and evening in wine , if there is no fever , otherwise in water in which quinces have been boiled .
SOL The fresh spleen of a sheep is placed , by a Magian prescription , over the painful spleen of a patient , the attendant saying that he is providing a remedy for the spleen .
After this the Magi prescribe that it should be plastered into the wall of the patient 's bedroom , sealed with a ring thrice nine times and the same words repeated .
If a dog 's spleen is cut out of the living animal and taken in food it cures splenic complaints ; some bind it when fresh over the affected part .
Others without the patient 's knowledge give in squill vinegar the spleen of a two-days-old puppy , or that of a hedgehog , also the ash of snails with linseed , nettle seed , and honey , until there is a complete cure .
Another remedy is a live green-lizard , hung up in a pot before the door of the bedroom of the patient , that he may touch it with his hand on going out and coming in , the ash of a horned owl 's head with an unguent , honey in which bees have died , or a spider , especially that called ' wolf .
' SOL The heart of a hoopoe is a prized remedy for pains in the side , as is the ash of snails boiled down in barley water ; these are also used by themselves as a liniment .
The skull of a mad dog is reduced to ash and sprinkled in drink .
For lumbago an overseas spotted lizard , with head and intestines removed , is boiled down in wine with half an ounce by weight of black poppy , and this broth is drunk .
Green lizards , with feet and head cut off , are taken in food , or three snails , beaten up with their shells and boiled down in wine with fifteen peppercorns .
They break off , in the opposite way to the joint , the feet of an eagle , so that the right foot is attached as an amulet for pains in the right side , the left foot for those in the left side .
The multipede too , that I have called oniscos , is another remedy , the dose being a denarius by weight taken in two cyathi of wine .
The Magi prescribe that an earthworm should be placed upon a wooden plate that has been split beforehand and mended with a piece of iron , soaked in water that has been taken up in the dish , and buried in the place from which it was dug out .
Then the water in the plate is to be drunk , which they say is a wonderful remedy for sciatica .
SOL Dysentery is relieved by a leg of mutton boiled down with linseed , the broth of which is drunk , by old cheese made with ewe 's milk , and by mutton suet boiled down in a dry wine .
By this are also benefited ileos and chronic cough , and dysentery by a spotted lizard from overseas , boiled down with its intestines , head , feet , and skin removed — it is as efficacious in food also as decocted — by two snails with egg , each beaten up with its shell , allowed to simmer in a new vessel with salt , two cyathi of raisin wine or date juice , and three cyathi of water ; this preparation is taken in drink .
Snails are also beneficial when burnt , and their ash taken in wine with a small piece of resin .
Snails without shells , about which I have spoken they are found chiefly in Africa — are very useful in dysentery ; five are burnt and taken with half a denarius by weight of gum acacia ; of this ash two spoonfuls are given in myrtle wine or any dry wine with an equal quantity of hot water .
Some , using all African snails , administer according to this recipe ; others prefer to inject the same number of African snails or broad snails , adding if the flux is severe gum acacia of the size of a bean .
The cast slough of snakes is boiled down with rose oil for dysentery and tenesmus in a pewter vessel ; if in any other kind of vessel , the application must be made with the help of pewter .
Chicken broth is good for these two complaints , but broth made with an old cock , thoroughly salted , is purgative .
A hen 's crop , roasted and given in oil and salt , soothes the pains of coeliac troubles — but previously hen and patient must both abstain from cereals as does dove 's dung roasted and taken in drink .
The flesh of a wood-pigeon boiled in vinegar is good for dysentery and for coeliac troubles ; for dysentery too a thrush roasted with myrtle berries , so are blackbirds and honey in which bees have died .
SOL The most serious disease of the abdomen is ileos .
It may be combated , they say , by tearing a bat apart and drinking its blood ; it is also a help to rub the belly with it .
Looseness of the bowels is checked by a snail prepared according to my prescription for asthma , and also by the ash , taken in a dry wine , of snails that have been burnt alive .
Other remedies are : the roasted liver of cocks or the skin of their crop , usually thrown away , mixed with poppy juice if dried , while some roast it fresh to be given in wine , partridge broth and its crop pounded by itself in dark wine , also wild wood-pigeon boiled down in vinegar and water , spleen of a sheep roasted and beaten up in wine , pigeon 's dung applied with honey , the gizzard of an osprey dried and taken in drink , very beneficial to those who cannot digest their food , even if they only hold it in their hand while eating .
Some use it as an amulet for this purpose , but it must not be so used continuously , for it makes the body thin .
Looseness is also checked by the blood of drakes .
Flatulence is dispersed by a diet of snails , griping by the spleen of sheep , roasted and taken in wine , wild wood-pigeon boiled down in vinegar and water , the fat of a bustard in wine , the ash of an ibis burnt without the feathers and taken in drink .
Another prescription for griping is of a marvellous character : it is said that if a duck is laid on the belly , the disease is transferred to the duck , which dies .
Good for griping is also boiled honey in which bees have died .
Colic is effectively cured by a crested lark , roasted and taken in food .
Some recommend that it should be burnt with the feathers in a new vessel , ground to dust and taken in water , three spoonfuls daily for four days , others that a lark 's heart should be tied as an amulet to the patient 's thigh , and others that it should be swallowed while fresh and still warm .
The Asprenates are a consular family in which one of two brothers was cured of colic by this bird taken in food and its heart worn in a golden bracelet , the other by performing a certain sacrifice in a shrine of unbaked bricks built in the shape of an oven , and when a certain rite was over blocking it up .
The osprey has only one gut , which through its wonderful character digests everything that the bird eats ; the end of it attached as an amulet is well known to be excellent for colic .
There are some obscure diseases of the intestines , for which is prescribed a wonderful cure .
If , before they can see , puppies are applied for three days especially to the stomach and chest of a patient , and suck milk from his mouth , the power of the disease is transferred to them ; finally they die and dissection makes clear the patient 's trouble ; the puppies must be buried in the earth .
The Magi indeed tell us that if the belly is touched with a bat 's blood there is protection from colic for a whole year ; should there be pain , it is sufficient if the patient can bring himself to drink the water in which he washes his feet .
SOL Mouse dung rubbed on the belly is good for stone in the bladder .
The flesh of a hedgehog is said to be pleasant to eat if it is killed by one blow on the head before it can void its urine on itself .
The flesh of hedgehogs killed in this manner is a remedy for obstruction to the urine ; another is fumigation with the same animal .
Should however it have voided its urine on itself those who have eaten the flesh are said to be attacked by strangury .
It is also recommended , in order to break up stone , to take earthworms in wine or raisin wine , or snails boiled down as for asthma ; three snails taken from their shells , pounded , and given in a cyathus of wine , on the next day two , and on the third day one , for removing difficulty of urination ; but the ash of the empty shells for expelling stone ; the liver of a water snake or the ash of scorpions to be taken in drink or in bread , the grits to be found in the gizzard of poultry or in the crop of wood-pigeons to be crushed and sprinkled on drink , also the skin of the crop of poultry .
When dried , or roasted when fresh , the dung too of wood-pigeons to be taken in beans for stone and other bladder trouble ; the ash too of wild wood-pigeon 's feathers in oxymel , three spoonful-doses of their intestines reduced to ash , a bit of earth from a swallow 's nest diluted with warm water , the crop of an osprey dried , dung of a turtle-dove boiled down in honey wine , or the broth of the bird itself .
To eat thrushes also with myrtle berries is good for the urine , cicadas roasted in a shallow pan , to take in drink the millipede oniscos , and for pains in the bladder the broth of lambs' trotters .
Chicken broth too is laxative and softens acridities , laxative too is the dung of swallows with honey used as a suppository .
SOL For complaints of the anus very efficacious are wool grease — some add pompholyx and rose oil — dog 's head reduced to ash , a serpent 's slough in vinegar , if there are chaps , the ash of white dog's-dung with rose oil — it is said to have been a discovery of Aesculapius , removing warts also very efficaciously — ash of mouse dung , fat of a swan , fat of a boa .
Prolapsus there is reduced by an application of snail juice extracted by pricks .
Chafings are relieved by the ash of a field mouse with honey , the gall of a hedgehog with the brain of a bat and bitch 's milk , by goose grease with goose brain , alum and wool grease , and by pigeon dung with honey ; specific for condylomata is a spider rubbed on the place when the head and feet have been removed ; to prevent the smart from acrid juices , apply goose grease with Punic wax , white lead , rose oil , and swan fat .
This fat is said also to cure haemorrhoids .
They say that beneficial for sciatica are raw snails , pounded with Aminnean wine and pepper and taken in drink , a green lizard taken in food , but with feet , bowels and head removed , also so treated a spotted lizard with the addition of three oboli of black poppy for ruptures and sprains , sheep 's gall with woman 's milk .
Itching eruptions and warts on the privates are treated with the gravy from the roasted lung of a ram , other genital affections by the ash , applied with water , of raw , even unwashed , ram 's wool , by the suet from the cad of a sheep , especially that of the kidneys , mixed with salt and the ash of pumice , by greasy wool in cold water , by the burnt flesh of sheep in water , by the ash of a she-mule 's hoofs , by the tooth of a horse , ground to powder and dusted on the parts , and complaints of the testicles by the bones of a horse 's head ground to powder without the flesh .
If either testicle hangs down , we are told that a remedy is found in applying the slime of snails .
Foul and running ulcers on these parts are relieved by the fresh ashes of a dog 's head , by the small broad kind of snail beaten up in vinegar , by the slough of a snake or its ash in vinegar , by honey in which bees have died mixed with resin , by the shell-less kind of snail , which I have said a breeds in Africa , beaten up with powdered frankincense and white of eggs ; the application is removed on the thirtieth day , and some add a bulb instead of frankincense .
Hydrocele , they tell us , is wonderfully benefited by the spotted lizard : head , feet , and bowels are removed , and the rest of the body is roasted — frequent doses are given in food — in food too for incontinence of urine they prescribe dog fat with split alum in doses the size of a bean , African snails burnt with their flesh and shell , the ash being taken in drink , three roasted geese tongues taken in food .
Sponsor for this treatment is Anaxilaus .
But superficial abscesses are opened by mutton suet and roasted salt ; they are dispersed by mouse dung mixed with powdered frankincense and sandarach , by ash of a lizard or the lizard itself , split and applied , also by multipedes pounded and mixed with one third part of terebinth resin — some add also red ochre of Sinope — by crushed snails by themselves , or by the ash of empty snail-shells mixed with wax .
Power to disperse is possessed by pigeon 's dung , applied by itself or with barley meal or with oatmeal .
Cantharides mixed with lime remove superficial abscesses as well as the lancet ; swelling of the groin is relieved by an application of small snails with honey .
SOL To prevent varicose veins the legs of children are rubbed with lizard 's blood , but both gout patient and rubber must be fasting .
Gouty pains are soothed by ocsypum with woman 's milk and white lead , by the dung of sheep that they pass liquid , by lungs of sheep , by ram 's gall with ram 's suet , by mice split and laid on the parts , by blood of a weasel applied with plantain and the ash of a weasel burnt alive with vinegar and rose oil — the remedy should be applied with a feather even a if wax and oil are made ingredients — by dog 's gall , which must not be touched by hand but applied with a feather , by dung of hens , by ash of earthworms with honey , taken off on the third day .
Some prefer to apply the worms in water , others prefer to rub the feet first with rose oil and then to apply without water an acetabulum of worms with three cyathi of honey .
Snails of the broad kind taken in drink are said to banish pains of the feet and joints ; the dose is two pounded in wine .
They are also applied with juice of the plant helxine ; some are content to beat them up in vinegar .
Salt , burnt with a viper in a new jar and taken frequently , frees they say from gout , adding that it is also beneficial to rub the feet with viper fat .
They assure us also that the kite is a remedy ; it is dried , pounded , and a three-finger pinch taken in water , or the feet are rubbed with its blood .
To the feet is also applied the blood of pigeons a with nettles , or their feathers may be used when they are just sprouting , beaten up with nettles .
Moreover their dung is applied to painful joints , also the ash of a weasel or of snails , and with starch or tragacanth .
Bruised joints are treated very effectively with spider 's web ; some prefer to use the ash of it , or else that of pigeon 's dung with pearl barley and white wine .
For dislocations a sovereign remedy is mutton suet with ash of woman 's hair .
For chilblains too is applied mutton suet with alum , or the ash of a dog 's head or of mouse dung .
But if they are clean , ulcers are brought to cicatrize by these with the addition of wax , or by the warm ash in oil of burnt dormice , also by that of field mice with honey , and by that of earthworms also with old oil and the snails that are found without shells .
All sores of the feet are healed by the ash of those snails that have been burnt alive , by the ash of hens' dung , and ulcerations by the ash of pigeon 's dung in oil .
Chafings caused by foot-wear are healed by the ash of an old shoe , by the lung of a lamb and of a ram ; for whitlows is specific a horse 's tooth ground to powder ; chafings under the feet of man or beast are healed by applying a green lizard 's blood , corns on the feet by applying the urine of a mule , male or female , with the mud made by it , by the dung of sheep , by the liver or blood of a green lizard laid on a piece of wool , by earthworms in oil , by the head of a spotted lizard with an equal quantity of agnus castus beaten up in oil , by pigeon 's dung boiled down in vinegar ; all kinds of warts are cured by fresh dog 's urine applied with its mud , by the ash of dog 's dung with wax , by the dung of sheep , by the application of fresh mouse-blood , or of a mouse itself torn asunder , by the gall of a hedgehog , by the head or blood of a lizard or the ash of the whole creature , by the slough of snakes , or by the dung of a hen with oil and soda .
Cantharides beaten up with Taminian grapes eat away warts , but when corroded in this way they must be treated by the other remedies I have prescribed for the complete healing of ulcers .
SOL Now I will turn to those ills that threaten the whole body .
The Magi say that the gall of a black male dog , if a house is fumigated or purified with it , acts as a talisman protecting all of it from sorcerers' potions ; it is the same if the inner walls are sprinkled with the dog 's blood or his genital organ is buried under the threshold of the front door .
Those would wonder less at this who know how highly the Magi extol that very loathsome animal the tick , on the ground that it is the only creature that has no vent for its gorging , nor yet any end save at death , living longer if it starves ; they tell us that so it lasts for seven days , but if they eat to satiety they burst in a shorter time .
They add that a tick from the left ear of a dog , worn as an amulet , relieves all pains .
They also consider the tick a prognostication of life or death , for if the patient at the beginning of his illness makes reply when he who has brought in with him a tick , standing at his feet inquires about the illness , there is sure hope of recovery ; should no reply be made the patient will die .
They add that the tick must be taken from the left ear of a dog that is completely black all over .
Nigidius has left it in writing that dogs run away for a whole day from the sight of one who has caught a tick on a pig .
Again , the Magi tell us that sprinkling with mole 's blood restores to their senses the delirious , while those who are haunted by night ghosts and goblins are freed from their terrors if tongue , eyes , gall , and intestines of a python are boiled down in wine and oil , cooled by night in the open air , and used as embrocation night and morning .
SOL For feverish chills Nicander gives as a remedy a dead serpent , the amphisbaena , worn as an amulet , or even its skin ; nay , he says that , if it is fastened to a tree that is being felled , the fellers feel no cold and do their business more easily .
So much does this , alone of serpents , stand up to the cold , being the first of all serpents to make its appearance , even before the cry of the cuckoo .
One wonderful thing about the cuckoo is , that if , on the spot where that bird is heard for the first time , the print of the right foot is marked round aud the earth dug out , no fleas breed wherever it is sprinkled .
SOL For those warding off paralysis the fats of decocted dormice and shrew mice are said to be very beneficial , as also millipedes taken in drink as I have prescribed for quinsy ; for consumptives a green lizard boiled down in three sextarii of wine to one cyathus , the daily dose being one spoonful until convalescence , or the ash of snails taken in wine ; SOL for epilepsy wool-grease with a morsel of myrrh , diluted with two cyathi of wine , a piece the size of a hazel nut being taken in drink , after the bath , or the testicles of a ram dried and pounded , half a denarius by weight being taken in a hemina of water or of ass 's milk ; to drink wine is forbidden for five days before and after .
Very highly praised also is the blood of sheep , taken by the mouth , the gall of sheep , especially of a lamb , with honey , sucking puppy taken in wine and myrrh after the head and feet have been cut off , the excrescence on the leg of a she-mule taken in three cyathi of oxymel , the ash of a spotted lizard from overseas taken in vinegar , the coat of a spotted lizard , which it casts in the same way as a snake , taken in drink .
Some have also given in drink the lizard itself , gutted with a reed and dried , others in food the lizard roasted on wooden spits .
It is worth while knowing how , when cast , the winter skin is hastily taken from the lizard , which otherwise devours it , for no living creature , they say , shows greater spite in cheating man , for which reason its name has been turned into a term of abuse .
They note in the summer time its nest , which is in the cornices over doors and windows , or in vaults or tombs .
Over against the nest in the beginning of spring they place cages like weels woven with split reeds , the narrow neck of which gives the creature actual delight , as thereby it casts off more easily the encumbrance of its covering , but when this has been left no return is possible .
No remedy for epilepsy is preferred to this .
A good one too is a weasel 's brain dried and taken in drink , or a weasel 's liver , testicles , uterus , or paunch , dried with coriander , as I have said ; likewise its ash , or a wild weasel taken whole in food .
All the same good qualities are praised in the ferret .
A green lizard , with seasonings to banish any nausea , the feet and head being taken off , and an application of snails , reduced to ash , with linseed , nettle seed , and honey , are also cures .
The Magi recommend the tail of a python attached as an amulet in gazelle skin by deer sinews , or the bits of stone from the crops of baby swallows fastened to the left upper arm ; for swallows are said to administer a bit of stone to each chick when hatched .
But if , at the first attack of epilepsy , the chick from the first egg laid is given to the patient in food , he is freed from that complaint ; afterwards the treatment is swallows' blood with frankincense , or eating a fresh swallow 's heart .
Moreover , a little stone , taken from a swallow 's nest and laid on the patient , is said to give immediate relief , and worn as an amulet permanent protection .
Highly praised also is eating a kite 's liver or a snake 's slough , a vulture 's liver pounded with its blood and taken in drink for thrice seven days , or the heart of a vulture 's chick worn as an amulet .
But they recommend also the vulture itself to be given in food , and that too when it has eaten its fill from a human corpse .
Some are of opinion that a vulture 's breast should be taken in drink in a cup made of Turkey-oak wood , or the testicles of a cock in water and milk , after abstinence from wine for five days ; for this purpose the testicles are preserved .
There have also been some who gave in drink twenty-one red flies , and that too from a corpse , but fewer to weak patients .
SOL Jaundice is combated by dirt from the ears or teats of a sheep , the dose being a denarius by weight with a morsel of myrrh and two cyathi of wine , by the ash of a dog 's head in honey wine , by a millipede in a hemina of wine , by earthworms in oxymel with myrrh , by drinking wine that has rinsed a hen 's feet — they must be yellow — after they have been cleansed with water , by the brain of a partridge or eagle taken in three cyathi of wine , by the ash of the feathers or intestines of a wood-pigeon taken in honey wine up to three spoonfuls , or by the ash of sparrows burnt over twigs taken in two spoonfuls of hydromel .
There is a bird called ' jaundice ' from its colour .
If one with jaundice looks at it , he is cured , we are told , of that complaint and the bird dies .
I think that this bird is the one called in Latin ' galgulus .
' SOL For brain-fever appears to be beneficial , a sheep 's lung wrapped warm round the patient 's head .
But who could give to one delirious the brain of a mouse to be taken in water , or the ash of a weasel , or even the dried flesh of a hedgehog , even if the treatment were bound to be successful ?
As for the eyes of the horned owl reduced to ash , I should be inclined to count this remedy as one of the frauds with which magicians mock mankind , and it is especially in fevers that true medicine is opposed to the doctrines of these quacks .
For they have actually divided the art according to the passing of the sun , and also that of the moon , through the twelve signs of the Zodiac .
That the whole theory should be rejected I will show by a few examples .
If the sun is passing through Gemini , they recommend the sick to be rubbed with the combs , ears , and claws of cocks , burnt and pounded with oil ; if it is the moon , the cocks' spurs and wattles must be used .
If either sun or moon is passing through Virgo , grains of barley must be used ; if through Sagittarius , a bat 's wings ; if the moon is passing through Leo , leaves of tamarisk , and they add that it must be the cultivated shrub ; if through Aquarius , boxwood charcoal , pounded .
Of these remedies I shall include only those recognised , or at least thought probable : for example , to rouse the victims of lethargus by pungent smells , among which perhaps I would put the dried testicles of a weasel or the fumes of his burnt liver .
For these patients also they consider it useful to wrap round the head the warm lung of a sheep .
SOL In quartans ordinary medicines are practically useless ; for which reason I shall include several of the magicians' remedies , and in the first place the amulets they recommend : the dust in which a hawk has rolled himself tied in a linen cloth by a red thread , or the longest tooth of a black dog .
The wasp they call pseudosphex , that flies about by itself , they catch with the left hand and hang under the chin , and others use the first wasp seen in that year ; a severed viper 's head attached in a linen cloth , or the heart taken from the creature while still alive ; the snout and ear tips of a mouse , wrapped in red cloth , the mouse itself being allowed to go free ; the right eye gouged out of a living lizard ; a fly in a bit of goat skin , with its head cut off ; or the beetle that rolls little pellets .
Because of this beetle the greater part of Egypt worships the beetle as one of its deities .
Apion gives an erudite explanation : he infers that this creature resembles the sun and its revolutions , seeking to find an excuse for the religious customs of his race .
But the Magi also make amulets of other beetles .
There is one with bent-back little horns , which they take up in the left hand ; a third kind , called fullo , with white spots , they cut in two and wear as an amulet on either upper arm ; all the rest are worn on the left arm ; the heart , taken out ' with the left hand from a living snake ; four joints of a scorpion 's tail , with the sting , wrapped in black cloth , care being taken that the sick man does not see , for three days , either the scorpion when set free or him who attaches the amulet ; after the third paroxysm he must hide it away .
They tie a thread three times round a caterpillar in a linen cloth , and with three knots , the ministering attendant saying at each knot the reason for so doing .
Other amulets are : a slug in a piece of skin , or four slugs' heads cut off with a reed , a multipede wrapped up in wool , the grubs from which gadflies are born , before they develop wings , or other hairy grubs found on thorny bushes .
Some shut up four of these grubs in a walnut shell and attach as an amulet .
Snails that are found without shells , or a spotted lizard shut up in a little box , they place under the patient 's head and let out when the fever goes down .
They also recommend the heart of a sea-diver , cut out without iron , dried and pounded , to be taken in warm water , or the hearts of swallows with honey ; others swallows' dung in doses of one drachma in three cyathi of goat 's or sheep 's milk or in raisin wine , to be taken before the parozysms .
Some hold that the entire swallow should be taken .
An asp 's skin , in doses of one sixth of a denarius by weight with an equal quantity of pepper , is taken by Parthian tribes as a cure for a quartan .
Chrysippus the philosopher has told us that wearing a phryganion as an amulet is a cure for quartans : but what the animal is Chrysippus has left no account , and I have met nobody who knew .
Yet a statement made by so great an authority it was necessary to mention , in case somebody 's research should meet with better success .
To eat the flesh of a crow or to apply its nest as a friction they think very beneficial in chronic diseases .
In tertians too it may be worth while to try whether there is any benefit ( so much does suffering delight in hoping against hope ) in the spider called lycos ( wolf ) applied with its web in a small plaster of resin and the wax to both temples and to the forehead , or in the spider itself attached as an amulet in a reed , in which form it is also said to be beneficial for other fevers .
A green lizard too may be tried , attached alive , in a vessel just large enough to contain it ; by which method we are assured that recurrent fevers also are often banished .
SOL For dropsy is given in drink wool grease in wine mixed with a little myrrh , in doses the size of a hazel nut .
Some also add goose grease in myrtle-wine .
The dirt from the udders of sheep has the same effect , as has the dried flesh of a hedgehog taken by the mouth .
An application too of dogs vomit to the abdomen brings away , we are assured , the dropsical fluid .
SOL Erysipelas is benefited by wool grease with pompholyx and rose oil , by the blood of a tick , by earth-worms applied in vinegar , by a cricket crushed between the hands — he who succeeds in doing this before the complaint shows itself is protected from an attack for the whole of that year , but the cricket must be lifted with iron along with the earth of its hole — by goose grease , by the head of a viper , kept till dry , burnt , and then applied in vinegar , a serpent 's slough applied in water with bitumen and lamb suet after a bath .
SOL A carbuncle is removed by pigeon 's dung , applied by itself or with linseed in oxymel , also by bees that have died in honey , applied and sprinkled with pearl barley .
If a carbuncle or other sore is on the privates , the remedy is wool grease with lead scales in honey , and sheep dung for incipient carbuncles .
Hard swellings and whatever needs to be softened are treated very efficaciously with goose grease , and equally good results are also given by the grease of cranes .
SOL Boils are said to be cured by a spider , applied before its name has been mentioned and taken off on the third day , by a shrewmouse , killed and hung up so that it does not touch earth after death , and passed three times round the boil , both the attendant and the patient spitting the same number of times , by the red part of poultry dung , best applied fresh in vinegar , by a stork 's crop boiled down in wine , by an odd number of flies rubbed on with the medical finger by dirt from the ears of sheep , by stale mutton suet with the ash of woman 's hair , and by ram 's suet with ash of burnt pumice and an equal quantity of salt .
SOL Burns are treated with ash of a dog 's head , the ash of dormice and oil , sheep dung and wax , the the ash of mice ; with the ash of snails so well that not even a scar is to be seen , with viper fat , and with the ash of pigeon 's dung applied in oil .
SOL Hard lumps in the sinews are treated with the ash of a viper 's head in cyprus oil , and by an application of earthworms and honey .
Pains in the sinews are soothed by fat , by a dead amphisbaena attached as an amulet , by vulture 's fat with its crop , dried and pounded with stale pig 's fat , by the ash of a horned-owl 's head taken in honey wine with the root of a lily , if we believe the Magi .
For cramp in the sinews woodpigeon 's flesh dried and taken in the food , for cramping spasms hedgehog 's flesh , also the ash of a weasel — a serpent 's slough attached as an amulet in a piece of bull 's leather prevents such spasms for opisthotonic tetanus the dried liver of a kite , the dose being three oboli taken in three cyathi of hydromel .
SOL Hangnails and whitlows that form on the fingers are removed by the ash of a dog 's head , or by the uterus boiled down in oil , with a layer on top of butter from ewe 's milk with honey , as also by the gall bladder of any animal ; roughness of the nails by cantharides and pitch , taken off on the third day , or by locusts fried with he-goat suet , and by mutton suet .
Some mix with the ingredients mistletoe and purslane , others flowers of copper and mistletoe , but remove the application on the third day .
Bleeding in the nostrils is arrested by inserting suet from the caul of a sheep , also by its rennet in water , especially by lamb 's rennet , snuffed up or injected , even if other remedies do no good , by goose grease with an equal quantity of butter worked up into lozenges , by the earth off snails , but also by the actual snails themselves , taken from their shells ; but when there is severe epistaxis it is stayed by snails beaten up and applied to the forehead , and also by spider 's web ; by the brain or blood of a cock are arrested fluxes from the brain , also by pigeon 's blood ; it is stored and congealed for this purpose .
SOL If however there is violent haemorrhage from a wound , it is wonderfully arrested by an application of the ash of horse-dung burnt with egg shells .
SOL Ulcers are healed by wool grease , barley ash , and copper rust , in equal parts ; this is also equally efficacious for carcinomata and spreading sores .
It cauterizes too the edges of ulcers , and levels out excrescences in the flesh ; it also fills up hollows and forms scars .
There is also great power to heal carcinomata in the ash of sheep 's dung with soda added , or in the ash of a lamb 's thigh bones , especially when ulcers refuse to cicatrize .
There is great power too in the lungs , especially those of rams , which flatten out very efficaciously excrescences of flesh on ulcers ; ewe dung too by itself , warmed under an earthen jar and kneaded , reduces swollen wounds , and cleans and heals fistulas and epinyctides .
The greatest power , however , is in the ash of a dog 's head , which cauterizes and thoroughly heals all excrescences as well as does spodium .
These are cauterized too by mouse dung , and also by the ash of weasel 's dung .
Indurations in deep-seated ulcers and carcinomata are penetrated by multipedes pounded and mixed with terebinth resin and earth of Sinope .
The same remedies are very useful for those ulcers that are threatened by worms .
Moreover , the various kinds of worms themselves have wonderful uses .
The larvae that breed in wood heal all ulcers ; and nomae too if burnt with an equal weight of anise and applied in oil .
Fresh wounds are united so well by earth worms that there is a general conviction that even severed sinews are by applying them made whole by the seventh day ; accordingly it is thought that they should be preserved in honey .
Their ash with liquid pitch or symphytum and honey removes too-hard edges of ulcers .
Some dry them in the sun , use in vinegar to treat wounds , and do not take them off without an interval of two days .
Used in the same way the earth too off snails is beneficial , and snails taken out whole , beaten up , and applied , unite fresh wounds and arrest nomae .
There is also an insect called by the Greeks herpes , which is specific for all creeping ulcers .
Snails also are good for them , beaten up with their shells ; with myrrh indeed and frankincense they are said to heal even severed sinews .
The fat of a python also , dried in the sun , is of great benefit , as is a cock 's brain for fresh wounds .
By viper 's salt taken in food we are told that ulcers become more amenable to treatment and heal more rapidly .
Indeed the physician Antonius after operating on ulcers without success gave vipers as food to bring about complete cures with wonderful rapidity .
The ash of the trixallis with honey removes hard edges on ulcers , as does ash of pigeon 's dung with arsenic and honey ; these also remove all that needs a cautery .
The brain of a horned owl with goose grease is said to unite wounds wonderfully , as , with woman 's milk , does the ash of a ram 's thighs the ulcers called malignant , but the cloths must be first carefully washed , or the screech owl boiled in oil , with which when melted down are mixed ewe butter and honey .
The lips of ulcers that are too hard are softened by bees that have died in honey , and elephantiasis by the blood and ash of a weasel .
Wounds and weals made by the scourge are removed by an application of fresh sheepskin .
SOL For fractures of the joints a specific is the ash of a sheep 's thighs with wax — this medicament is more efficacious if there are burnt with the thighs the sheep 's jawbones and a deer 's horn , and the wax is softened with rose oil — specific for broken bones is a dog 's brain , spread on a linen cloth , over which is placed wool , occasionally moistened underneath ( with oil ) .
In about fourteen days it unites the broken parts , as does quite as quickly the ash of a field-mouse with honey , or that of earthworms , which also extracts fragments of bone .
SOL Scars are restored to the natural colour by the lungs of sheep , particularly of rams , by their suet in soda , by the ash of a green lizard , by a snake 's slough boiled down in wine , and by pigeon 's dung with honey ; the last in wine does the same for both kinds a of white vitiligo ; for vitiligo cantharides also with two parts of rue leaves .
These must be kept on in the sun until the skin is violently irritated ; then there must be fomentation and rubbing with oil , followed by another application .
This treatment should be repeated for several days , but deep ulceration must be guarded against .
For vitiligo of all kinds they also recommend the application of flies with root of eupatoria , or the white part of hens' dung kept in old oil in a horn box , or bat 's blood , or hedgehog 's gall in water .
Itch scab however is relieved by the brain of a horned owl with saltpetre , but best of all by dog 's blood , and pruritus by the small , broad , kind of snail , crushed and applied .
SOL Arrows , weapons , and everything that must be extracted from the flesh , are withdrawn by a mouse split and laid on the wound , but especially by a split lizard , or even its head only , crushed and laid on the wound with salt , by the snails that attack leaves in clusters , crushed and similarly laid on with the shells , and edible snails without them , but most efficaciously by the bones of snakes with hare 's rennet .
These bones also , with the rennet of any quadruped , show a good result by the third day .
Cantharides too are highly recommended , beaten up and applied with barley meal .
SOL For women 's complaints the afterbirth of an ewe is of service , as I said when speaking of goats .
The dung too of sheep has the same medicinal uses .
Fumigation with lobsters is of the greatest help in strangury in women .
If occasionally after conception a woman eats the testicles of a cock , males are said to be formed in the uterus .
The foetus is retained by taking in drink the ash of porcupines , brought to maturity by drinking bitch 's milk , and withdrawn by the afterbirth of a bitch , which must not touch the earth , laid on the loins of the woman in childbed .
Mouse dung diluted with rain water reduces the breasts of women swollen after childbirth .
Rubbing the woman all over with the ash of hedgehogs and oil prevents miscarriage .
The delivery of those is easier who have swallowed goose a with two cyathi of water , or the liquids that flow from a weasel 's uterus through its genitals .
Applying earthworms prevents pains in the sinews of neck and shoulders , and taken in raisin wine bring away a sluggish afterbirth .
These worms laid by themselves on the breasts also mature suppurations there , open them , draw out the pus , and make them cicatrize .
Taken with honey wine they stimulate the flow of milk .
There are also little worms found n grass ; these , tied round the neck as an amulet , prevent a miscarriage , but they are taken off just before the birth , otherwise they prevent delivery , Care too must be taken not to lay them on the earth .
Further , to cause conception five or seven at a time are given in drink .
Snails taken in food hasten delivery , and conception too if applied with saffron .
An application of snails in starch and tragacanth arrests fluxes .
They are also good for menstruation if taken in food , and correct with deer 's marrow displacements of the uterus ; to one snail should be added a denarius by weight of marrow and cyprus oil .
Inflation too of the uterus is dispersed by snails taken out of their shells and beaten up with rose oil .
For these purposes the most preferred are snails of Astypalaea .
African snails are prepared in a different way ; doses of two are beaten up with a three-finger pinch of fenugreek , four spoonfuls of honey added , and the whole applied after rubbing the abdomen with iris juice .
There are also found straying everywhere small snails with a white corslet .
Dried in the sun on tiles , crushed to powder , and mixed with an equal quantity of bean meal , these impart both whiteness and smoothness to the skin .
The desire to scratch is removed by the small , broad snails with pearl barley .
If a woman with child step across a viper she will miscarry ; similarly if she cross an amphisbaena , a dead one at least , but those that carry on their persons a live one in a box step across with impunity ; even if it is a dead one and preserved it makes childbirth easy .
In the case of a dead one , wonderful to relate , no harm is done should a pregnant woman cross it without a preserved one , if she at once crosses a preserved one .
Fumigation with a dried snake assists menstruation .
SOL A snake 's slough , tied to the loins as an amulet , makes childbirth easier , but it must be taken off immediately after delivery .
They also give it in wine to be taken with frankincense ; in any other way it causes miscarriage .
A stick with which a frog has been shaken from a snake helps lying-in women , and the ash of the trixallis , applied with honey , helps menstruation , as does a spider that is spinning a thread from a height .
It should be caught in the hollow of the hand , crushed ?
and applied ; but if it is caught as it ascends again , the same treatment will arrest menstruation .
The stone aetites , found in the eagle 's nest , protects a foetus from all plots to cause abortion .
A vulture 's feather , placed under their feet , helps lying-in women .
It is certain that pregnant women must avoid a raven 's egg , since if they step over it they will miscarry through the mouth .
A hawk 's dung taken in honey wine seems to make women fertile .
Indurations and abscesses of the uterus are softened by goose grease or by swan 's grease .
SOL The breasts after delivery are safeguarded by goose grease with rose oil and a spider 's web .
The Phrygians and Lycaonians have found that the fat of bustards is beneficial for teats disordered by childbirth .
For uterine suffocation beetles also are applied .
Ash of partridge eggshells mixed with cadmia and wax keeps the breasts firm .
They also think that breasts do not droop if circles are traced round them three times with the egg of partridge or quail , and that if this egg is swallowed it also produces fertility and an abundant supply of milk as well , that it lessens pains in the breasts if they are rubbed with it and goose grease , that it breaks up moles in the uterus , and that uterine itch is relieved if it is applied with crushed bugs .
SOL Bats' blood is a depilatory , but an application to the armpits of boys is not enough unless copper rust or hemlock seed is spread over it afterwards ; this treatment either removes the hair altogether or reduces it to down .
They think that a bat 's brain is equally efficacious — this brain is double , red and white asome adding the bat 's blood and liver .
Others in three heminae of oil thoroughly boil a viper after taking out the bones , using the decoction as a depilatory after first plucking out the hairs they do not wish to grow again .
The gall of a hedgehog is a depilatory , especially when mixed with a bat 's brain and goat 's milk , as is also the ash by itself .
Parts rubbed with the milk of a bitch with her first litter , when the hairs have been plucked out or not yet grown , do not grow hair again .
The same result is said to be produced by the blood of a tick plucked from a dog , by the blood or gall of a swallow , or by the eggs of ants .
They say that eyebrows are made black by crushed flies ; if however it is desired that the eyes of babies should be black , the expectant mother must eat a shrewmouse ; hair is prevented from turning grey by the ash of earth-worms mixed with oil .
SOL Babies that are troubled with curdled milk have a preventative in lamb 's rennet taken in water or if the trouble has occurred with milk already curdled it is dispersed by this rennet given in vinegar .
For dentition the brain of a sheep is very beneficial .
The inflammation of babies called siriasis is cured by the bones found in dog 's dung worn as an amulet , and hernia in babies by bringing a green lizard to bite them when asleep .
Afterwards they fasten the lizard to a reed and hang it in smoke , and they say that as it dies the baby recovers .
The slime of snails applied to the eyes of babies straightens the eyelashes and makes them grow .
Hernia is cured by the ash of snails applied for thirty days with frankincense in white of egg .
There are found in the little horns of snails sandy grits ; worn as an amulet these make dentition easy .
The ash of snail shells mixed with wax checks procidence of the end of the bowel , but the ash should be mixed with the discharge that exudes when the snails are pricked .
A viper 's brain tied on with a piece of his skin helps dentition .
The same effect have also the largest teeth of serpents .
The dung of a raven attached with wool as an amulet cures babies' coughs .
Certain details can scarcely be included as serious items , but I must not omit them , since they have been put on record .
As a remedy for hernia in babies they recommend a lizard ; there should be taken a male , which can be recognised by its having one vent beneath the tail .
The necessary ritual is : that it must bite the lesion through a gold or silver barrier ; then it must be fastened in an unused cup and placed in smoke .
Incontinence of urine in babies is checked by giving in their food boiled mice .
The tall , indented horns of the beetle , fastened to babies , serves as an amulet .
In the head of the boa is said to be a little stone , which is spit out by it when in fear of violent death ; they add that dentition is wonderfully aided if the creature 's head is cut off unawares , the stone extracted and worn as an amulet .
The brain too of the same creature they recommend to be worn for the same purpose , or the stone or little bone found on the back of a slug .
A splendid help also is the brain of a ewe rubbed on the gums , as for the ears is goose grease put in them with juice of ocimum .
On prickly plants are grubs which are rough and downy .
These worn by babies as an amulet are said to effect an immediate recovery when part of their food sticks in the throat .
SOL Sleep is induced by wool grease with a morsel of myrrh diluted in two cyathi of wine , or else with goose grease and myrtle wine , by the cuckoo bird in a piece of hare 's fur worn as an amulet or by a heron 's beak worn as an amulet on the forehead in a piece of ass 's hide .
It is thought too that the beak of the heron by itself rinsed in wide has the same effect .
Sleep is kept away , on the contrary , by a dried bat 's head worn as an amulet .
SOL A lizard drowned in a man 's urine is antaphrodisiac to him who passed it , but the Magi claim that it is a love-philtre .
Antaphrodisiac too are snails , and pigeon 's dung taken with oil and wine .
Aphrodisiac for men are the right parts of a vulture 's lung , worn as an amulet in a piece of crane 's skin ; aphrodisiac also are the yolks of five pigeons' eggs mixed with a denarius by weight of pig fat and swallowed in honey , sparrows or their eggs in food , or the right testicle of a cock worn as an amulet in a piece of ram's-skin .
They say that rubbing with ibis ash , goose grease and iris oil prevent miscarriage when there has been conception ; that desire on the contrary is inhibited if a fighting cock 's testicles are rubbed with goose grease and worn as an amulet in a ram s skin , as it also is if with a cock 's blood any cock 's testicles are placed under the bed .
Women unwilling to conceive are forced to do so by hairs from the tail of a she-mule , pulled out during the animal copulation and entwined during the human .
A man who passes his urine on a dog 's is said to become Less sexually active .
A wonderful thing again ( if it is true ) is told about the ash of the spotted lizard : if wrapped in a linen cloth and held in the left hand it is aphrodisiac ; if transferred to the right hand it is antaphrodisiac .
Another wonder : the blood of a bat , collected on a flock of wool and placed under the head of women , moves them to lust , as does the tongue of a goose , taken either in food or in drink .
SOL The lice of phthiriasis even of the whole body are destroyed in three days by taking in drink the maggots , east slough of a snake , or by drinking , with a little salt , whey after the cheese has been taken out .
They say that if the brain of a weasel is added to rennet , cheeses neither go rotten through age nor are touched by mice .
If the ash too of a weasel is given to poultry or pigeons in their mash , they are said to be safe from weasels .
Pains of draught animals in making urine are ended by a bat put on them as an amulet , and hots by a woodpigeon carried three times round their middle .
Wonderful to relate , the woodpigeon on being set free dies , while the animal is at once freed from pain .
SOL The eggs of an owl , given for three days in wine to drunkards , produce distaste for it .
Drunkenness is kept away by taking early the roasted lung of sheep .
A swallow 's beak reduced to ash , beaten up with myrrh , and sprinkled on the wine that will be drunk , will free drinkers from fear of becoming tipsy .
This is a discovery of Orus , king of Assyria .
SOL In addition to all this there are some notable things about the animals that belong to this Book : the gromphena , a bird spoken of in Sardinia as like a crane , but now , I think , unknown even to the Sardinians .
In the same province we have the ophion , a creature like deer only in its hair , and found nowhere else .
The same authorities say that there is a creature called siralugum , but they have not told us what kind of an animal it is or where it is found .
I do not indeed doubt that it once existed , since even medicines from it have been prescribed .
Marcus Cicero tells us that there are animals called biuri which gnaw the vines in Campania .
SOL There are still some wonders in the animals that I have mentioned : that a dog does not bark at a person having on him the membrane from the afterbirth of a bitch , or holding the dung or hair of a hare ; included among gnats are mullones , which live only for a day ; those taking honey from hives are not stung by the bees if they have on them the beak of a woodpecker ; pigs follow those from whom they have received in their mash the brain of a raven ; the dust in which a she-mule has wallowed , sprinkled on the body , lessens the fires of love .
Shrew mice are put to flight if one of them is castrated and let go free ; if a snake 's skin , salt , emmer wheat , and wild thyme are pounded together and with wine poured down the throat of oxen when the grapes are ripening , they enjoy good health for a whole year , or if three young swallows are given at three meals in their mash ; if dust is gathered from the track of a snake and sprinkled on bees , these return to their hives ; if the right testicle of a ram is tied up he begets ewes only ; those are not wearied by any toil who have on them sinews from the wings and legs of a crane ; she-mules do not kick if they have drunk wine .
The hoofs of she-mules are the only material discovered that is not rotted by the poisonous water of Styx , a notable fact discovered by Aristotle , to his great infamy , when Antipater sent a draught of it to Alexander the Great .
Now I will pass to things found in water .
SOL
