NOR even the woods and the wilder face of Nature are without medicines , for there is no place where that holy Mother of all things did not distribute remedies for the healing of mankind , so that even the very desert was made a drug store , at every point occurring wonderful examples of that well-known antipathy and sympathy .
The oak and the olive are parted by such inveterate hatred that , if the one be planted in the hole from which the other has been dug out , they die , the oak indeed also dying if planted near the walnut .
Deadly too is the hatred between the cabbage and the vine ; the very vegetable that keeps the vine at a distance itself withers away when planted opposite cyclamen or wild marjoram .
Moreover , trees , it is said , that are now old and being felled are more difficult to cut down , and decay more quickly , if man 's hand touch them before the axe .
There is a belief that beasts of burden know at once when their load consists of fruit , and unless it is first shown to them straightway begin to sweat , however small their load may be .
Fennel-giant makes very agreeable fodder for the ass ; to other beasts of burden , however , it is a quick poison .
For this reason the animal is sacred to Father Liber , as is also fennel-giant .
Lifeless things also , even the most insignificant , have each their own special poisons .
By means of linden bark and fine flour cooks extract excessive salt from food ; salt reduces the sickliness of over-sweet things ; water that is nitrous or bitter is sweetened by the addition of pearl barley , so that within two hours it is drinkable , and for this reason pearl barley is put into linen wine-strainers .
The chalk of Rhodes and the potter 's earth of our own country possess a similar property .
Affinities show their power when pitch is taken out by oil , both being of a greasy nature .
Oil alone mixes with lime , both hating water .
Gum is more easily removed by vinegar , ink by water , and countless other examples besides will be carefully given in their proper place .
SOL Hence sprang the art of medicine .
Such things alone had Nature decreed should be our remedies , provided everywhere , easy to discover and costing nothing — the things in fact that support our life .
Later on the deceit of men and cunning profiteering led to the invention of the quack laboratories , in which each customer is promised a new lease of his own life at a price .
At once compound prescriptions and mysterious mixtures are glibly repeated , Arabia and India are judged to be storehouses of remedies , and a small sore is charged with the cost of a medicine from the Red Sea , although the genuine remedies form the daily dinner of even the very poorest .
But if remedies were to be sought in the kitchen-garden , or a plant or a shrub were to be procured thence , none of the arts would become cheaper than medicine .
It is perfectly true that owing to their greatness the Roman people have lost their usages , and through conquering we have been conquered .
We are the subjects of foreigners , and in one of the arts they have mastered even their masters .
But of this more elsewhere .
SOL In their proper places I have already spoken of the plant called lotus , and also of the Egyptian plant called by the same name , sometimes known also as the tree of the Syrtes .
The berries of this lotus , which by our countrymen is called the Greek bean , cheek looseness of the bowels .
Shavings of the wood , boiled down in wine , are good for dysentery , irregular menstruation , giddiness and epilepsy .
They also prevent the hair from falling out .
It is strange that nothing is more bitter than these shavings or sweeter than Lotus fruit .
From the sawdust also of the wood a medicine is prepared by boiling it down in myrtle water ; it is then kneaded and cut into lozenges , which make a very useful medicine for dysentery , the dose being one victoriatus to three cyathi of water .
SOL Pounded acorns with salted axle-grease cure the indurations that are called malignant .
More potent are those of the holm-oak , and in all acorns the more potent parts are the peel itself and the skin just under it .
A decoction of the latter is good for coeliac affections .
In cases of dysentery also even the acorn itself is applied .
The same decoction is a remedy for snake bites , fluxes and suppurations .
The leaves and berries , or the bark , or the liquid of a decoction , counteract poisons .
A decoction of the bark in cows' milk is applied to snake bites , and the bark in wine is given for dysentery .
The holm-oak has the same properties .
SOL The scarlet berry of the holm-oak is applied to fresh wounds in vinegar and to fluxes of the eyes in water ; it is dropped into eyes that are blood-shot .
There is also a kindred berry , found commonly in Africa and Asia , quickly turning into a little worm ; for this reason it is called seoleeium , and is in low esteem .
The main varieties of it I have already !
given .
SOL We have classified just as many varieties of gall-nut — the solid and the perforated , the white and the dark , the larger and the less .
The properties of all are alike , although the best kind comes from Commagene .
They remove excrescences of flesh , and are good for the gums , the uvula , and an ulcerated mouth .
Burnt and then extinguished with wine they are applied for coeliac affections and dysentery , in honey to whitlows , scabrous nails , hangnails , running sores , eondylomata , and the sores called ' phagedaenie .
' A decoction moreover in wine is dropped into the ears and also used as an application the eyes ; with vinegar it is used for eruptions and superficial abscesses .
The inner part of the nut when chewed relieves toothache , and also chafing of the skin and burns .
Taken unripe in vinegar gall-nuts reduce a swollen spleen ; then again , burnt and extinguished in salt and vinegar , they check excessive menstruation and prolapse of the uterus if used as a fomentation .
All kinds of gall-nut blacken the hair .
SOL I have already said that the choicest mistletoe is thought to come from the hard-wood oak , and I have given the way of preparing it .
Some crush it and boil in water until none of it floats on the surface ; others chew the berries and spit out the skins .
The best birdlime from mistletoe is without any skin , and very smooth , yellow on the outside and leek-green within .
Nothing is more sticky than this birdlime .
It is emollient , disperses tumours , and dries up scrofulous sores ; with resin and wax it softens superficial abscesses of every sort .
Some add galbanum also , equal in weight to each of the other ingredients , and this mixture they use also for the treatment of wounds .
The lime smoothes scabrous nails , but the application must be taken off every seven days and the nails washed with a solution of soda .
Some superstitiously believe that the mistletoe proves more efficacious if it be gathered from the hard-wood oak at the new moon without the use of iron , and without its touching the ground ; that so it cures epilepsy , helps women to conceive if they merely a carry it on their persons ; that chewed and applied to sores it heals them most effectively .
SOL The globules growing on the hardwood oak mixed with bear 's grease restore hair lost through manges The leaves , bark and acorns of the Turkey oak dry up gatherings and suppurations , and check fluxes .
Paralysed parts of limbs are strengthened by fomenting with a decoction of it , which as a sits bath is useful for drying and bracing these parts .
The root of this tree counteracts the poison of scorpions .
SOL The bark of the cork-tree , pounded and taken in hot water , arrests haemorrhage from either part of the body , and the ashes of the same taken in heated wine are highly praised as a cure for spitting of blood .
SOL Beech leaves are chewed for affections of the leaves .
gums and of the lips .
The ashes of the beech nut make a liniment for stone in the bladder , and with honey for mange .
SOL The pounded leaves of the cypress are applied to fresh wounds , and with pearl barley to the head in cases of sunstroke ; they make an application also for hernia , for which too they are taken in drink .
With wax they make an ointment also for swollen bread and kneaded in Aminean wine , soothe pains in the feet and sinews .
The globules on this tree are taken in drink for snake bites or for the bringing up of blood , and used as an application for gatherings .
Gathered while soft , and pounded with axle-grease and bean meal , they are also good for hernia .
For the same purpose they are taken in drink .
Mixed with meal they are applied to parotid tumours and to scrofulous sores .
Pounded with the seed these globules yield a juice , which mixed with oil takes away films on the eyes .
Taken too in doses of one victoriatus in wine and used as an ointment with a rich dried fig , from which the seeds have been removed , it cures affections of the testicles , disperses tumours , and with leaven heals scrofulous sores .
Cypress root , pounded with the leaves and taken in drink , cures affections of the bladder and strangury , and counteracts the poison of spiders .
The shavings taken in drink act as an emmenagogue , and neutralize the stings of scorpions .
SOL The big cedrus , which they call cedrelate , yields a pitch which is called cedria , very useful for toothache ; for it breaks the teeth and brings them out , easing the pain .
I have already described how cedrus juice is extracted from the wood , of great use for book-rolls were it not for the headache it causes .
It preserves dead bodies uncorrupted by time , but causes living ones to decay — a strange inconsistency , to rob the living of their life and to give a quasi-life to the dead !
It also makes clothes decay and kills animal life .
For this reason I should not think it ought to be used as a remedy for quinsy , or for indigestion , as some have recommended , taken by the mouth .
I should also be afraid to rinse the teeth with it in vinegar , when they ache , or to drop it into the ears for hardness of hearing or worms .
Gossip records a miracle : that to rub it all over the male part before coition prevents conception .
I should not hesitate to use it as an ointment for phthiriasis or for scurf .
It is also recommended to take it in raisin wine to counteract the poison of the sea hare , but more readily it might be used as liniment for leprosy .
For foul sores and excrescences in them , and for spots and films on the eyes , certain authorities have prescribed it as an ointment , and have directed that a cyathus of it be drunk for sores on the lung , as well as for tapeworm .
There is prepared from it an oil also , which they call ' pisselaeoni ' used for all the same purposes , but of greater potency .
It is well ascertained that snakes are kept away by the sawdust of cedrus , and that to rub the body with the crushed berries mixed with oil has the same result .
SOL Cedrides , that is the fruit of the cedrus , cure a cough , are diuretic , arrest looseness of the bowels , and are useful for ruptures , sprains , spasms , strangury and uterine affections , forming an ingredient of antidotes for the poison of sea hares and those poisons mentioned above , and being used for gatherings and inflammations .
SOL About galbanum I have already spoken .
The best kind is considered to be that which is neither moist nor dry , and such as I have indicated .
It is taken in drink by itself for chronic cough , asthma , ruptures and sprains ; it is used as an application for sciatica , pains in the sides , superficial abscesses , boils , separation of flesh from bones , scrofulous sores , knotty lumps at the joints , and tooth-ache .
With honey too it makes an ointment for sores on the head .
With rose oil or nard it is injected for pus in the ears .
Its smell is beneficial for epilepsy , choking of the uterus , and for weakness of the stomach .
A pessary or fumigation brings away the foetus when there is a miscarriage , and so will a branch of hellebore smeared with it and laid under the woman .
I have said that snakes are kept off by the fumes caused by burning it ; they do not come either near persons rubbed with galbanum .
It heals also scorpion stings .
A piece the size of a bean is taken in a cyathus of wine for difficult deliveries , and it reduces a displaced uterus ; while with myrrh and wine it brings away a dead foetus .
With myrrh and wine it also counteracts poisons , particularly those used on arrows .
Mixed with oil and spondylium it kills snakes if it but touches them .
It is supposed to make urination difficult .
SOL Similar is the nature of ammoniacum and of its tear , which should be tested in the way I mentioned .
It softens , warms , disperses , and dissolves .
In eye salves it promotes clearness of vision .
It removes itch , scars , and white spots on the eyes , and relieves toothache , more effectively when it has been set alight .
It is good for difficulty of breathing , pleurisy , affections of the lungs and bladder , blood in the urine , diseases of the spleen , and sciatica , if it be taken in drink — thus administered it also loosens the bowels — and , boiled with an equal weight of pitch or wax and with rose oil , it makes a good ointment for diseases of the joints and for gouty pains .
It brings superficial abscesses to a head , and extracts corns , when mixed with honey — so applied it also softens indurations — and combined with vinegar and Cyprian wax or rose oil it makes a very effective application for diseases of the spleen .
A rubbing with ointment made up of this gum , with vinegar , oil and a little soda , is a good remedy for fatigue .
SOL The nature of storax also I have spoken of in my account of foreign trees .
In addition to the qualities there mentioned , the most esteemed kind is very rich , unadulterated , and breaks up into white fragments .
It cures coughs , affections of the throat , chest diseases , and obstructions or indurations of the uterus ; by the mouth or as a pessary it acts as an emmenagogue ; it loosens the bowels .
I find in my authorities that a moderate dose dispels melancholy , but that a larger one causes it ; that an injection cures singing in the ears , a local application scrofulous sores and knotty lumps on the sinews .
It counteracts poisons that harm by chilling , and therefore , among others , hemlock .
SOL Spondylium , which I described at the same time , is with old oil poured on the heads of sufferers from phrenitis , lethargus and headache of long standing .
It is also taken in drink for affections of the liver , for jaundice , epilepsy , asthma , and choking of the uterus ; for these fumigation is also beneficial .
It loosens the bowels .
With rue it is used as a liniment for spreading sores .
The blossom is injected with good results into purulent ears , but the juice , when it is being extracted , must be covered over , since it has a wonderful attraction for flies and such-like insects .
The shavings of the root inserted into fistulas eat away their callosities .
They are also dropped with the juice into the ears .
The root also itself is given for jaundice and for affections of the liver and of the uterus .
If the head is rubbed with it ; the hair becomes curly .
SOL Sphagnos , or sphacos , or bryon , grows also , as I have pointed out , in Gaul .
It is useful in the sits bath for uterine affections , and beaten up , and mixed with cress and salt water , it is also good for the knees and for swellings on the thighs .
Taken in drink moreover , with wine and dry resin , it very quickly acts as a diuretic .
Beaten up and drunk with wine and juniper berries , it drains off the water in dropsy .
SOL The leaves and root of the turpentine-tree are applied locally to gatherings ; a decoction of them strengthens the stomach .
The seed is taken in wine for headache and strangury ; it is a gentle aperient and an aphrodisiac .
SOL The leaves of pitch-pine and of the larch pin crushed and boiled down in vinegar are good for toothache , and the ash of their bark for chafing and burns .
Taken in drink it checks looseness of the bowels , is diuretic , and as a fumigation reduces a displaced uterus .
The leaves of pitch-pine are specific for affections of the liver , the dose being a drachma by weight taken in hydromel .
It is well known that woods consisting only of those trees from which pitch and resin arc scraped off are very beneficial to consumptives , or to those who cannot convalesce after a long illness , and that the air in districts so planted is more health-giving than a sea-voyage to Egypt , or than draughts of milk from cattle that have grazed along summer pastures in the mountains .
SOL The ground-pine , the Latin name of which is abiga , because it causes abortion , and to some known as ' earth-incense ,' has branches a cubit in length , with the flowers and the smell of the pine .
A second species is shorter and bent , with leaves like those of ?
aizollm .
A third variety has the same smell , and therefore also the same name ; it is rather small , with a stem as thick as a finger , and with rough , slender , pale leaves , growing on rocky soils .
All three are plants , not trees , but should be considered here because their names are derived from that of the pine .
They are good for the stings of scorpions , and also for the liver when applied with dates or quinces , as is a decoction of them with barley meal for the kidneys and bladder .
Decoctions of them in water are taken also for jaundice and for strangury .
The last mentioned kind mixed with honey counteracts the poison of serpents , and in this form too purges the uterus when used as a pessary .
Taken as drink it draws away extravasated blood .
Rubbing with it promotes perspiration , and it is particularly good for the kidneys .
It is also made up into pills with figs for dropsy ; these purge the bowels .
In doses of one victoriatus by weight in wine it ends lumbago , and also coughs if taken in good time .
A decoction in vinegar taken as a drink is said to expel at once the dead foetus .
SOL For a like reason honourable mention shall be made of pityusa also , which some include in the same class as tithymalus .
It is a shrub like the pitch-pine , with a small , purple flower .
Bile and phlegm are earned off in the stools by a decoction of the root , the dose being one hemina , and by suppositories made of a spoonful of the seed .
A decoction of the leaves in vinegar removes scaly eruptions on the skin and , mixed with a decoction of rue , is good for affections of the breasts , for griping pains , for snake bites and for gatherings in general in their early stages .
SOL That resin is derived from the trees mentioned above , with its various kinds and native regions , I have stated in my account of wine , and afterwards when dealing with trees .
The most general classes are two — the dry resin and the liquid .
Dry resin comes from the pine and the pitch-pine , the liquid from the terebinth , larch , lentisk and cypress .
For in Asia and Syria these last also produce it .
They are mistaken who think that the same resin comes from the pitch-pine as comes from the larch .
For the pitch-pine exudes a resin that is rich , and like frankincense in consistency , while the larch produces a thin resin with the colour of honey and a very offensive odour .
Medical men use liquid resin only occasionally , generally that from the larch and administered in egg , for coughs and ulcerated bowels , nor is that from the pine much used ; the others are only employed after boiling .
The various ways of boiling I have fully explained .
Of the various trees producing resin , the favourite is the terebinth , which yields one highly scented and very light ; of the regions , Cyprus and Syria are most favoured ; both resins are of the colour of Attic honey , but the Cyprian is thicker , with more body in it .
In the dry kind the qualifies looked for are whiteness , purity and transparency ; in every kind , however , that from a mountain soil is preferred to that from the plains , and a north-east aspect produces more highly esteemed resin than any other .
Resin is dissolved in oil for the treatment of wounds and for poultices ; by means of bitter almonds when used for draughts .
Its medical properties are to close wounds , to act as a detergent , and to disperse gatherings ; terebinth resin is also good for chest complaints .
The last when warmed is used as an ointment for pains in the limbs ; it is removed after a walk has been taken a in the sun .
Slave-dealers especially are anxious to use this ointment for rubbing over the whole bodies of their slaves , with the object of correcting thinness ; by walks afterwards they loosen the skin of every limb , and they have the further object of making possible the assimilation of a greater quantity of food .
Next in popularity after terebinth resin comes that from the lentisk , which has an astringent quality and is more diuretic than the others .
The rest of the resins loosen the bowels , cure indigestion , relieve chronic coughs , and also , when used as a fumigation , remove obstructions in the uterus .
These are specific for the poison of mistletoe , and with beef suet and honey they heal superficial abscesses and similar affections .
Lentisk resin is a most excellent remedy for turning outwards ingrowing eyelashes , and is also very useful for fractures and for pus in the ears , and also for irritation of the genitals .
Pine resin is a very good remedy for wounds in the head .
SOL Pitch too , its source and the methods of preparing it , I have already mentioned , as well as its two kinds , the thick and the thin .
Of the thick pitches the most useful in medicine is the Bruttian , because being both very rich and very resinous it combines the useful properties of both , the yellow-red kind being of higher value than any other because of this combination .
For the further opinion about pitch , that the male tree produces a better kind , cannot I think be entertained .
The nature of pitch is to warm , and to fill out the flesh .
Mixed with pearl barley it is a specific antidote for the bite of the horned viper , and with honey a good remedy for quinsy , catarrhs and sneezing caused by phlegm .
Mixed with rose oil it is poured into the ears , and with wax it is compounded into an ointment .
It heals lichen and relaxes the bowels ; expectoration it eases if used as an electuary or applied to the tonsils in combination with honey .
So used it also cleanses sores and fills them out .
With raisins and axle-grease it cleanses carbuncles and festering sores ; for creeping sores , however , it is combined with pine bark or sulphur .
Some authorities have prescribed it in doses of one cyathus for consumption and chronic cough .
It cures chaps in the seat , and on the feet , superficial abscesses , scabrous nails , indurations and displacements of the uterus , and lethargus by inhalation .
Scrofulous sores it causes to suppurate if boiled with barley meal and the urine of a child not yet adolescent .
Dry pitch is also used for mange ; Bruttian pitch heated in wine , with wheat meal , is applied to the breasts of women , the applications being as hot as can be borne .
SOL How liquid pitch and the oil called pisselaeon are made has been described already .
Some boil it down twice and call it palimpissa .
Liquid pitch is employed for painting quinsy internally .
It is good for earache , for promoting clearness of vision , for use as a lip-salve , for asthmatics , the uterus , chronic cough , frequent expectoration , cramp , nervous tremors , opisthotonic tetanus , paralysis , pains in the sinews , and most effectively for itch-scab in dogs and beasts of burden .
SOL There is also pissasphaltos , that is pitch combined with bitumen , found in a natural state in the territory of Apollonia ; it is sometimes made artificially .
It is a specific for itch-scab in cattle and for the sores caused by the young on the teats of their mothers .
The best part of it is that which floats on the surface when it is boiled .
SOL Zopissa , as I have said , is scraped off ships , wax being soaked in sea brine .
The best is taken from ships after their maiden voyage .
It is also added to poultices to disperse gatherings .
SOL A decoction in vinegar of pitch pine makes an efficacious wash for aching teeth .
SOL Of the lentisk tree the seed , bark and gum-drops are diuretic , and astringent to the bowels .
A decoction of them is a useful fomentation for creeping sores .
It makes a liniment for moist sores and also for erysipelas , and it rinses the gums .
The leaves are rubbed on the teeth when they ache ; loose teeth are rinsed with the decoction , which also dyes the hair .
The gum-drops are good for troubles of the seat , when there is a call for a drying and warming remedy .
The decoction too of the gum is useful for the stomach , being carminative and diuretic , and is also applied with pearl barley for headache .
The tender leaves are applied to inflamed eyes .
The mastic of the lentisk is applied for bending back the eyelashes , for filling out and smoothing the skin of the face , being also useful for spitting of blood , chronic cough , and in all cases where the medical properties of gum acacia are called for .
Abrasions are treated by applying the oil made from the seed of lentisk mixed with wax , or a decoction of the leaves in oil ; or they may be fomented with these preparations and water .
I know for a fact that when the illness of Considia , daughter of Marcus Servilius , a consular , long a resisted all rigorous treatment , it was cured by the physician Democrites , who used the milk of goats which he fed on the lentisk .
SOL The plane tree neutralizes the poison of the bat ; its seed-globules taken in wine in a dose of four denarii act similarly on all poisons of serpents and scorpions , besides healing burns .
Pounded moreover with strong vinegar , especially squill-seasoned vinegar , it checks all bleeding , and with the addition of honey removes freckles , cancerous sores and chronic pustules on the neck .
The leaves moreover and bark make ointment for gatherings and suppurations , and so does a decoction of them ; a decoction of the bark in vinegar is a remedy for sore teeth , but for the eyes a decoction of the most tender leaves in white wine must be made .
The down of the flowers is harmful both to the ears and to the eyes .
The ashes of the burnt globules heal burns and frost-bites .
The bark in wine allays the stings of scorpions .
SOL The power of the ash-tree to neutralize the poison of snakes I have already mentioned .
The seed lies between its leaves which in wine are used for pains in the liver and sides , and draw off the subcutaneous water of dropsy .
They lessen corpulence , gradually reducing the body to leanness .
These leaves are also beaten up with wine in proportion to the strength of the body ; for a child five leaves are soaked in three cyathi of wine , for stronger patients seven leaves in five cyathi .
I must not forget the warning of some authorities , who declare that the shavings and sawdust of the ash are to be avoided .
SOL The root of the maple crushed in wine makes a very efficacious application for pains of the liver .
SOL The clusters of the white poplar , as I have already described , are used in making unguents .
A draught made from the bark is good for sciatica and strangury , and the juice of the leaves , warmed , for earache .
Those who hold in their hand a twig of poplar need not fear chafing between the legs .
The black poplar that grows in Crete is considered the most efficacious ; the seed in vinegar is good for epilepsy .
It also discharges a small quantity of resin , which is used for poultices .
A decoction of the leaves in vinegar is applied locally for gout .
The moisture exuding from the hollows of the black poplar , and giving out an odour when applied with rubbing , removes warts and pimples .
Poplars also produce on their leaves drops from which bees make bee-glue .
With water these drops also have the same healing properties as bee-glue .
SOL The leaves , bark and branches of the elm are styptic , and have the property of closing wounds .
The inner bark in particular relieves leprous sores , as also does a local application of the leaves soaked in vinegar .
One denarius of the bark , taken in a hemina of cold water , purges the bowels , being specific for carrying off phlegms and watery humours .
Its tear is also applied locally to gatherings , wounds and burns , which it is good to foment with a decoction .
The moisture forming in the pods of this tree brings a brightness to the skin and makes the looks more pleasing .
The tips of the little stalks of the leaves boiled down in wine cure tumours and draw out the pus through fistulas .
The same property is shown by the inner barks .
Many hold that the bark when chewed is very good for wounds , and that the leaves , pounded and sprinkled with water , are so for swollen feet .
An application of the moisture too , that exudes , as I have said , from the pith of the tree when lopped , restores hair to the scalp and prevents it from falling out .
SOL The linden tree is good for practically the same purposes as the wild olive , but its action is milder .
Only its leaves , however , are used both for babies' sores and for those in the mouth ; they may be chewed or a decoction may be made of them ; they are diuretic .
Applied locally they check menstruation ; taken in drink they draw off extravasated blood .
SOL The elder has a second , a much smaller species , growing wilder and called by the Greeks chamaeacte , by others helion .
A decoction in old wine of the leaves , seed , or root , of either species , taken as drink up to two cyathi for a dose , is bad for the stomach , though carrying off watery humours from the bowels .
It also reduces inflammation , especially that of a recent burn , and a dog-bite is relieved by a poultice of its most tender leaves with pearl barley .
An application of the juice softens gatherings on the brain , being specific when these are on the membrane that surrounds it .
Its berries have weaker properties than the other parts .
They dye the hair .
A dose of one acetabulum taken in drink is diuretic .
The softest of the leaves are eaten with oil and salt to bring away phlegm and bile .
For all purposes the smaller kind is the more efficacious .
A decoction of the root in wine , taken in doses of two cyathi , draws off the water of dropsy ; it also softens the uterus , as does also sitting in baths of a decoction of the leaves .
The tender stalks of the cultivated elder boiled in a saucepan relax the bowels ; the leaves taken in wine also counteract the bites of snakes .
SOL An application of young shoots with goat-suet is very good for gout ; these are also steeped in water to kill fleas by sprinkling .
If a place is sprinkled with a decoction of the leaves flies are killed .
Boa is the name given to a disease when the body is red with pimples ; beating with a branch of elder is administered as a remedy .
The inner bark pounded and taken in white wine relaxes the bowels .
SOL The juniper , even above all other remedies , is warming and alleviates symptoms ; for the rest , it resembles the cedrus .
Of it there are two species , one smaller than the other .
Either kind when set on fire keeps off snakes .
The seed is beneficial for pains in the stomach , chest and side , dispels flatulence and the feeling of chill , relieves coughs and matures indurations .
Applied locally it checks tumours ; the berries taken in dark wine bind the bowels , and a local application reduces tumours of the belly .
The fruit is also an ingredient of antidotes and of digestive remedies , and is diuretic .
It is also applied locally to the eyes for fluxes , and it is used for sprains , ruptures , colic , uterine disorders and sciatica , either in doses of four berries with white wine , or a decoction of twenty in wine .
There are also some who smear the body with an extract of the seed as a protection against snakebite .
SOL The fruit of the willow before maturity develops a kind of cobweb , but if it be gathered earlier it is good for the spitting of blood .
Mixed with water , the ash from the burnt bark of the tips of the branches cures corns and callosities .
It removes spots on the face , more thoroughly when mixed with willow juice .
This juice , however , is of three kinds : one exudes like gum from the tree itself ; the second flows from an incision , three fingers wide , made in the bark while the tree is in blossom .
This sort is useful for clearing away humours that obstruct the eyes , also for thickening where that is necessary , for promoting urine and for draining outwards all gatherings .
The third kind of juice is obtained by lopping off the branches , when it drips under the sickle .
One , then , of these juices warmed in a pomegranate rind with rose oil is poured into the ears , or a local application is made of the boiled leaves beaten up with wax .
For gout too it is most useful to foment the sinews with a decoction of the bark and leaves in wine .
The blossom beaten up with the leaves removes scurf on the face .
The leaves thoroughly pounded and taken in drink check over-lustful desire ; too many doses produce absolute impotence .
The seed of the black willow of Ameria with an equal weight of litharge , applied after the bath , acts as a depilatory .
SOL The agnus castus is not very different from the willow , either for its use in wickerwork or in the appearance of its leaves , but it has a more pleasant smell .
The Greeks call it lygos , sometimes agnos , because the Athenian matrons , preserving their chastity at the Thesmophoria , strew their beds with its leaves .
There are two kinds of it .
The larger grows up to be a tree like the willow ; the smaller is branchy , with paler , downy leaves .
The first bears pale blossom with some purple in it , and is called the white agnus ; the other , which bears only purple blossom , is called the dark agnus .
They grow on marshy plains .
The seed taken in drink has a taste somewhat like wine ; it is said to reduce fevers , to stimulate perspiration when applied as embrocation with oil , and also to dispel lassitude .
The trees furnish medicines that promote urine and menstruation .
They go to the head like wine — for the smell too is similar — drive flatulence into the lower bowels , check diarrhoea , and greatly benefit dropsy and splenic diseases .
They encourage abundant rich milk , and neutralize the poisons of serpents , especially those that bring on chill .
The smaller kind makes the more effective remedies for the bite of serpents ; one drachma of the seed , or two of the most tender leaves , is taken in wine , or in vinegar and water .
Either kind makes a liniment for the bites of spiders ; mere smearing drives away poisonous creatures , as does fumigation also , or placing some of the plant under the bed .
They check violent sexual desire , and for this reason in particular they act as antidotes to the venomous spider , the bite of which excites the genitals .
The blossom and tender shoots mixed with rose oil clear away headache due to intoxication .
The seed takes away by fomentation with a decoction the more severe type of headache , purges the uterus also by fumigation or a pessary , and the bowels if drunk with pennyroyal and honey .
Boils and superficial abscesses that refuse to come to a head are softened by an application of it with barley meal .
With saltpetre and vinegar the seed cures lichens and freckles , with honey sores of the month and of eruptions , those of the testes with butter and vine leaves , chaps in the seat when applied with water , dislocations when applied with salt , soda and wax .
With the seed the leaves too are added to plasters for the relief of painful sinews and of gout .
A decoction of the seed in oil is poured in drops on the head of sufferers from lethargus or phrenitis .
It is said that those who keep a twig in their hand or in their girdle do not suffer from chafing between the thighs .
SOL The Greeks call erice ( heath ) a shrub differing only a little from the agnus castus ; it has the same colour and very nearly the same leaf as rosemary .
Report says that it counteracts the poison of serpents .
SOL Genista also is used for cords , and has a flower of which bees are very fond .
I wonder whether this is the plant that Greek writers have called sparton , because , as I have mentioned , from it the Greeks are wont to make their fishing lines , and whether Homer had it in mind when he said that ' the ships' cords ( sparta ) were loosed .
' It is certain that the Spanish or African esparto grass was not yet in use , and though ships were made with sewed seams , yet it was with flax that they were sewed and never with esparto .
The seed of this plant , which the Greeks call by the same name , grows in pods like those of the cowpea , and purges instead of hellebore if a drachma and a half with four cyathi of hydromel are drunk on an empty stomach .
The branches , together with the leaves , soaked in vinegar for several days and then beaten up , yield a juice beneficial for sciatica in doses of one cyathus .
Some prefer to soak them in seawater and inject as an enema .
The same juice with the addition of oil is used as an embrocation for sciatica .
Some too use the seed for strangury .
Pounded genista with axle-grease cures painful knees .
SOL Lenaeus calls the myrice ( tamarisk ) erica ( heath ) , comparing it to the brooms of Ameria .
He says that boiled in wine , beaten up with honey , and applied to cancerous sores it heals them .
Some authorities consider it to be the same as tamarice .
But it is specific for splenic trouble if its juice is extracted and drunk in wine ; so wonderful do they make out its antipathy to be to this internal organ , and to this only , that they affirm that if pigs drink out of troughs made of this wood they are found to be without a spleen .
And for that reason they give to a man also , if he has an enlarged spleen , food and drink in vessels made of tamarisk .
A respected medical authority , moreover , has asserted that a twig , broken off from it without its touching the ground or iron , relieves bellyache , if it be so applied as to be pressed to the body by the tunic and the girdle .
The common people , as I have said , call this tree unlucky , because it bears no fruit and never is planted .
SOL Corinth and the part of Greece around it call brya a tree of which they distinguish two kinds : the wild , which is absolutely barren , and the cultivated .
The latter in Egypt and Syria bears , and that abundantly , large-stoned fruit bigger than a gall-nut and bitter to the taste , which physicians use instead of gall-nuts in the medical mixtures which they call antherae .
The wood also , and the blossom , leaves and bark , are used for the same purposes , although they are less potent .
The pounded bark is given for the spitting of blood and for excessive menstruation , also to sufferers from coeliac disease .
An application of the same bark pounded checks all kinds of gatherings .
From the leaves is extracted a juice employed for the same purposes .
The leaves are also decocted in wine ; but by themselves with honey added they are applied to gangrenous sores .
A decoction of them taken in wine or the leaves themselves applied locally with rose oil and wax are soothing .
So used they also cure epinyctis ; a decoction of them is healing to toothache and earache ; the root is similarly used for the same purposes .
The leaves furthermore are applied with pearl barley to spreading ulcers .
A drachma by weight of the seed is taken in drink for the poison of phalangia and other spiders ; it is applied however with chicken fat to boils .
It is an antidote also to the poison of serpents except that of the asp .
It is also good for jaundice , phthiriasis and nits , if a decoction is used as a liniment , and this too checks excessive menstruation .
The ash from the tree is good for all the same purposes .
They say that if it is mixed with the urine of a castrated ox and taken in either drink or food it is antaphrodisiac .
A burning coal of this wood is quenched with the urine mentioned and kept in the shade .
This , when you want to light it , crumbles to powder .
The Magi have recorded that the urine of a eunuch also has the same effect .
SOL Nor is the red-twigged tree considered more lucky .
Its inner bark opens scars which have healed too soon .
SOL The leaves of siler applied to the forehead relieve headache .
The seed of it too crushed in oil checks phthiriasis .
Serpents keep away from this shrub also , and for this reason rustics carry a walking stick made of it .
SOL Privet , if it is the same tree as the cypros of the East , has its own uses in Europe .
Its juice benefits sinews , joints and chills ; its leaves everywhere are used to treat chronic ulcer and , with a sprinkling of salt , sores in the mouth ; the berries are employed for phthiriasis , and the berries or the leaves for chafing between the thighs .
The berries also cure the pip in chickens .
SOL The leaves of the alder in very hot water are a remedy for tumours .
SOL I have pointed out twenty kinds of ivy .
The medicinal properties of all are twofold in action .
Ivy deranges the mind and also clears the head when taken too copiously in drink ; taken internally it injures sinews , while an external application does them good .
All kinds of ivy , being of the same character as vinegar , are of a cooling nature .
They are diuretic when taken in drink ; they relieve headache ; especially beneficial to the brain and to the membrane enclosing it is an application of soft leaves pounded and boiled with vinegar and rose oil , more rose oil being added afterwards .
They are also applied to the forehead , and a decoction of them is used to foment the mouth and to rub the head .
They are good for the spleen whether taken in drink or used as liniment .
They are also boiled or beaten up in wine for the shivers of ague and for outbursts of phlegm .
Clusters also of ivy berries cure splenic trouble , either taken in drink or applied locally ; for liver trouble , however , they must be applied .
Pessaries of berries promote menstruation .
Ivy juice , especially that of the white cultivated ivy , cures complaints and offensive smell of the nostrils .
The same poured into the nostrils clears the head , more thoroughly if soda is added .
It is also poured with oil into purulent or painful ears .
It furthermore removes the ugly marks of scars .
For troubles of the spleen the juice of the white kind warmed with hot iron is more efficacious .
A sufficient dose is six berries taken in two cyathi of wine .
Berries of white ivy taken three at a time in oxymel expel tapeworms , and in this treatment it is also beneficial to apply the berries to the belly .
The ivy that I have called golden-berried a draws off in the urine the subcutaneous water of dropsy , if twenty of the golden berries are beaten up in a sextarius of wine and the mixture is drunk in doses of three cyathi .
Erasistratus prescribed five berries of the same ivy , pounded in rose oil and warmed in the rind of a pomegranate , for toothache , the injection to be made drop by drop into the ear opposite to the pain .
If the berries that have a saffron juice are taken in drink beforehand , they keep off the headache that follows drinking ; they are likewise good for the spitting of blood and for colic .
The whiter clusters of the dark ivy taken in drink make even men sterile .
A decoction in wine of any kind of ivy is applied locally to every kind of ulcer , even if it is malignant .
The tears of the ivy act as a depilatory and remove phthiriasis .
The blossom of any sort of ivy , taken in dry wine twice a day , a three-finger pinch at a time , corrects dysentery and looseness of the bowels .
With wax it is useful as an ointment for bums .
The clusters turn the hair black .
The juice of the root , taken in vinegar , is good for the bite of poisonous spiders .
I find also that patients with diseases of the spleen are cured if they drink from a vessel made of this wood .
They crush too the berries , then burn them , and in this way apply them to burns that have previously been bathed with warm water .
There are also some who make incisions in ivy for the sake of the juice , which they use for decayed teeth ; they say that the teeth break off , those nearest being protected by wax lest they should be injured .
They obtain also a gum from ivy , which in vinegar is recommended as very useful for the teeth .
SOL The Greeks give the name cisthos , which is very like cissos ( ivy ) , to a shrub larger than thyme and with leaves like those of ocimum .
There are two kinds of it ; the flower of the male is rose-coloured , of the female , white .
Both are good for dysentery and looseness of the bowels , the dose being as much of the blossom as can be taken in three fingers , this quantity to be swallowed in a dry wine twice a day ; for chronic ulcers and for burns the blossom is applied with wax , and by itself for ulcers in the mouth .
It is especially under these shrubs that there grows the hypocisthis , which I shall describe when I treat of herbs .
SOL The plant called cissos erythranos by the Greeks is like ivy .
Taken in wine it is good for sciatica and lumbago ; so strong is the property of the berry that it brings away blood in the urine .
Chamaecissos again is the name they give to an ivy that never rises from the ground .
This too crushed in wine and taken in doses of an acetabulum cures splenic trouble ; the leaves with axle-grease are applied to bums .
The milax also , which has the further name of anthophoros ( flower-bearer ) , has a likeness to the ivy , though the leaves are more slender .
A chaplet of it made with an odd number of leaves is said to be a cure for headache .
Some authorities have declared that there are two kinds of milax .
One is very nearly everlasting , grows in shaded valleys , is a climber of trees , bears berries in luxuriant clusters , and is most efficacious against all poisonous things to such a degree that , if the juice of the berries is repeatedly administered in drops to babies , no poison will hereafter do them any harm .
The other kind is said to be fond of cultivated ground and to grow there , having no medicinal value .
The former milax they state to be the one the wood of which , we said , gives out a sound when placed close to the ear .
Like it is the plant that some have called elematis , which climbs along trees and is itself jointed .
Its leaves cleanse leprous sores ; its seed loosens the bowels if an acetabulum of it is taken in a hemina of water or in hydromel .
A decoction of it is administered for the same purpose .
SOL I have pointed out twenty-eight kinds of reed , and nowhere is more obvious that force of Nature which I describe in these books one after another , if indeed the root of the reed , crushed and applied , draws a fern stem out of the flesh , while the root of the fern does the same to a splinter of reed .
To increase the number of the various reeds there is that which grows in Judea and Syria and is used for scents and unguents ; boiled down with grass or celery seed this is diuretic , and when made into a pessary acts as an emmenagogue .
A cure for sprains , for troubles of the liver and of the kidneys , and for dropsy , is two oboli taken in drink ; for a cough also inhalation is used , the addition of resin being an improvement ; for scurf and running sores is used a decoction with myrrh .
Its juice also is collected and made into a drug like elaterium .
Of all reeds the parts nearest the root are the most efficacious , and the joints are more efficacious than other pads .
The Cyprian reed , called donax , has a bark which , reduced to ash , is a remedy for mange and also for festering sores .
Its leaves are used for extracting splinters , and are also good for erysipelas and for all gatherings .
The common reed has the power to extract if freshly pounded , and not the root only , for many hold that the reed itself too has this property .
The root applied in vinegar cures dislocations and pains of the spine ; the same ground fresh and taken in wine is aphrodisiac .
The down on reeds placed in the ears deadens the hearing .
SOL Akin to the reed is a plant growing in Egypt , the papyrus , which , when it has been dried , is especially useful for expanding and drying fistulas , and , by swelling , for opening them to admit medicaments .
The paper made from it is , when burnt , one of the caustic remedies .
Its ash taken in wine induces sleep .
The plant itself applied with water cures callosities .
SOL Not even in Egypt does the ebony-tree grow , as I have stated , and in my medical research I omit foreign regions ; yet I must not pass it by , as it is a great marvel .
Its sawdust is said to be a sovereign remedy for the eyes ; its wood , ground on the whetstone and mixed with raisin wine , to dispel dimness of vision ; its root , applied however in water , to disperse white specks on the eyes ; cough too to be cleared away if an equal measure of draeunculus root is added along with honey .
Physicians include ebony among erosive remedies .
SOL The rhododendros has not even found a Latin name among the Romans , names for it being rhododaphne or nerium .
It is a strange fact that , while its leaves are poisonous to quadrupeds , to man on the other hand , if rue is added and the mixture taken in wine , they are a protection against the poison of snakes .
Sheep too and goats , if they drink water in which these leaves have been steeped , are said to be killed by it .
SOL Neither has rhus received a Latin name , although many uses are made of it .
For it is both a wild plant with myrtle-like leaves and short stems , which expels tapeworms , and also the shrub called ' the tanner 's ' , of a reddish colour , a cubit high , and of the thickness of a finger , the leaves of which when dried are used as is pomegranate rind in the tanning of leather .
Physicians moreover use the leaves of rhus for bruises , likewise for coeliac trouble , sores in the seat and for what they call eating ( phagedaenic ) ulcers .
Pounded with honey and applied with vinegar ... a decoction of them is dropped into suppurating ears .
A decoction of the branches makes a mouthwash , which is used for the same purposes as that made from mulberries , but it is more efficacious when mixed with alum .
This is also applied to dropsical swellings .
SOL What is called rhus erythros ( red sumach ) is eryta , the seed of this shrub .
It has astringent and cooling properties .
It is sprinkled on viands instead of salt when the bowels have been relaxed , and with silphium added makes all meat sweeter .
With honey it cures running sores , roughness of the tongue , and livid or excoriated bruises ; applied in the same way it very quickly causes wounds on the head to cicatrize .
Taken as food it checks excessive menstruation .
SOL A different plant is erythrodanum , called by some ereuthodanum , and rubia by the Romans , which is used to dye wool and to tan leather .
As a medicine it is diuretic , and taken in hydromel cures jaundice ( lichen too if applied with vinegar ) , sciatica and paralysis if the patient bathes daily while taking the draught .
The root and the seed are emmenagogues , check diarrhoea and disperse gatherings .
The branches with the leaves are applied for snakebites .
The leaves also dye the hair .
I find in some authorities that jaundice is cured if this shrub is merely looked at while worn as an amulet .
SOL The plant called alysson differs from the last only in having smaller leaves and branches .
It has received its name because it prevents persons bitten by a dog from going mad if they take it in vinegar and wear it as an amulet .
The authorities add the wonderful marvel that the mere sight of this shrub dries up sanies .
SOL Radicula too prepares wools for the dyers ; I have said that it is called struthion by the Greeks .
It cures jaundice both when taken by itself in drink and in the form of a decoction , and likewise chest troubles ; it promotes urine , loosens the bowels and purges the uterus , for which reason physicians call it ' golden goblet ' .
With honey too it is a splendid remedy for a cough , and in doses of a spoonful for orthopnoea ; but with pearl barley and vinegar it removes leprous sores .
Again , with panaces and caper root it breaks up and expels stone in the bladder , and a decoction with barley meal and wine disperses superficial abscesses .
It is used as an ingredient of poultices , and of eye-salves to improve the vision ; it is especially useful for making the patient sneeze , and also for troubles of the spleen and liver .
The same plant taken in hydromel in doses of one denarius by weight cures asthma and pleurisy and all pains in the side .
SOL Dog's-bane is a shrub having a leaf like that of ivy but softer ; the tendrils are shorter , and the seed is pointed , grooved , downy , and strong smelling .
If given in their food this seed in water kills dogs and all other quadrupeds .
SOL Rosemary has been mentioned already .
There are two kinds of it ; one is barren , and the other has a stalk and a resinous seed called cachrys .
The leaves have the smell of frankincense .
A local application of the fresh root heals wounds , prolapsus of the anus , condylomata , and haemorrhoids .
The juice both of the shrub and of the root cures jaundice and such conditions as call for cleansing .
It sharpens the eyesight .
The seed is given in drink for chronic complaints of the chest and with wine and pepper for uterine trouble ; it is an emmenagogue , and with darnel meal is applied locally for gout ; an application also clears away freckles , and is used when a calorific or sudorific is called for , also for sprains ; milk is increased when it , and when the root , is taken in wine .
The herb itself is applied with vinegar to scrofulous sores , and with honey is good for a cough .
SOL There are , as I have said , many kinds of eachrys .
But the one growing on rosemary , the plant just described , is resinous if rubbed .
It neutralizes poisons , and the venom of all creatures except snakes .
It promotes perspiration , dispels colic , and produces a rich supply of milk .
SOL Sabine herb , called brathy by the Greeks , is of two kinds .
One has a leaf like that of the tamarisk , the other like that of the cypress , for which reason some have called it the Cretan cypress .
Many use it instead of frankincense for fumigations ; in medicines moreover a double dose is said to be equivalent in strength to a single dose of cinnamon .
It reduces gatherings and checks corroding sores ; an application cleanses ulcers , and used as a pessary or for fumigation it brings away the dead foetus .
With honey it is used as an ointment for erysipelas and carbuncles ; taken in wine it cures jaundice .
By fumigation sabine herb is said to cure the pip in chickens .
SOL Like this sabine herb is the plant called selago .
It is gathered without iron with the right hand , thrust under the tunic through the left arm-hole , as though the gatherer were thieving .
He should be clad in white , and have bare feet washed clean ; before gathering he should make a sacrificial offering of bread and wine .
The plant is carried in a new napkin .
The Druids of Gaul have recorded that it should be kept on the person to ward off all fatalities , and that the smoke of it is good for all diseases of the eyes .
SOL The same authorities have called samoius ( brook-weed ) a plant growing in moist regions , which ( they say ) is to be gathered with the left hand by fasting persons to keep off the diseases of swine and oxen .
As one gathers it one must not look at it , nor place the plant anywhere except in the trough , where it should be crushed for the animals to drink .
SOL I have mentioned a the different kinds of gums .
The better the sort of each kind the more potent its effect .
Gums are injurious to the teeth , coagulate blood and therefore benefit those who spit blood ; they are also good for burns though bad for affections of the trachea ; they promote urine and lessen the bitter taste in things .
Gums generally are acrid , but the gum that comes from bitter almonds , and is more efficacious for giving astringency to the internal organs , possesses heating properties .
The gums from plums , cherries and vines are less esteemed .
An application of gum has drying and astringent properties , in vinegar moreover it cures lichens on babies , and four oboli taken in must are good for a chronic cough .
Gums are believed to improve the complexion and also the appetite ; they are good for stone when taken with raisin wine .
They are especially useful for the eyes and for wounds .
SOL The Arabian thorn — I have mentioned the merits of the Egyptian thorn in my section on scents — even by itself by its thickening nature checks all fluxes , spitting of blood and excessive menstruation , and there is even more potency in its root .
SOL The seed of the white thorn is a help against the stings of scorpions , and a crown of it when worn lessens headache .
Like it is the plant called acanthion by the Greeks , but this has much smaller leaves , which have prickly points and are covered with down like cobweb .
In the East this is even gathered to make a silk-like cloth .
The leaves by themselves , or the roots , are taken in drink as a cure for opisthotonic tetanus .
SOL A gum also is produced in Egypt from the acacia-thorn , from a pale tree and a dark , and likewise from a green tree , which is far better than the former two .
Gum is also produced in Galatia ; it is very inferior , and comes from a more thorny tree than the others .
The seed of all the trees is like the lentil , only both grain and pod are smaller .
It is gathered in autumn ; if gathered earlier , its tonic properties are too powerful .
The pods are steeped in rainwater and then pounded in a mortar .
The juice is then extracted from them by presses , and finally thickened into lozenges by exposure to the sun in basins .
A juice is also extracted from the leaves , but it is less efficacious .
For tanning leather they use the seed instead of gall-nuts .
The juice of the leaves and of the Galatian acacia is very dark , and considered of little value , as is also the juice of the deep-red kind .
The purple gum , the dun-coloured , and that which dissolves most easily — these have the highest tonic and cooling qualities these are particularly useful for eye-salves .
For purposes the lozenges are washed by some , roasted by others and by others thoroughly burnt .
They dye the hair , and cure erysipelas , creeping ulcers , moist complaints of the body , gatherings , bruised joints , chilblains and hangnails .
They check excessive menstruation in women and are good for prolapsus of the uterus and anus , also for the eyes and for sores of the mouth and of the genitals .
SOL Our common thorn also , from which the fullers' coppers are filled , has a root with uses .
Throughout the Spains , many use it as a scent and as an ingredient of ointments , calling it aspalathus of this name in the East , white , and as big as an ordinary tree , SOL but it is also the name of a shrub , lower in height but equally thorny , that grows in the islands Nisyrus and Rhodes , called by some ervsisceptrum , by others sphagnos , and by the Syrians diaxylon .
The best is that least like fennel-giant , of a red colour or inclining to purple when the bark has been removed .
It grows in several regions , but not everywhere has it a perfume .
I have described its powerful scent when the rainbow rests extended over the shrub .
It cures foul ulcers in the mouth , polypus , ulcerated genitals and those with carbuncles , and also chaps ; taken in drink it clears away flatulence and strangury .
The bark is good for those who bring up blood , and a decoction of it checks looseness of the bowels .
The wild shrub also is thought to have similar properties .
SOL There is also a thorn with the name of appendix , because the bright red berries hanging from it are called appendixes .
These , either raw by themselves or dried and boiled down in wine , check looseness of the bowels and colic .
The berries of pyracantha are taken in drink for the bites of serpents .
SOL Paliurus too is a species of thorn .
Its seed the Africans call zura ; it is very efficacious for scorpion sting , and likewise for stone and cough .
The leaves have an astringent quality .
The root disperses superficial abscesses , gatherings and boils ; taken in drink it is diuretic .
A decoction of it in wine checks looseness of the bowels and neutralizes the poison of serpents .
The root especially is given in wine .
SOL The leaves of the holly , crushed and with the addition of salt , are good for diseases of the joints , while the berries are good for menstruation , coeliac trouble , dysentery and cholera .
Taken in wine they check looseness of the bowels .
An application of the decocted root extracts objects embedded in the flesh , and is very useful for dislocations and swellings .
A holly tree planted in a town house or country house keeps off magic influences .
Pythagoras has recorded that by its blossom water is solidified , and that a holly stick , cast at any animal , even if through want of strength in the thrower it falls short of the quarry , of its own accord rolls nearer the mark , so powerful is the nature of this tree .
The smoke of the yew tree kills rats and mice .
SOL Not even brambles did Nature create for harmful purposes only , and so she has given them their blackberries , that are food even for men .
They have a drying and astringent property , being very good for gums , tonsils and genitals .
They counteract the venom of the most vicious serpents , such as the haemorrhois and prester ; the bloom or the berry counteracts that of scorpions .
They close wounds without any danger of gatherings .
Their stalks are diuretic , being pounded when young and the juice extracted , which is then condensed in the sun to the thickness of honey , and is considered to be , whether taken by the month or used as ointment , a specific for affections of the mouth or eyes , for spitting of blood , quinsy , troubles of the uterus or anus , and for coeliae affections .
For affections of the mouth , indeed , even the chewed leaves are efficacious , and they are used as ointment for running sores , or for any kind of sore on the head .
Even prepared thus without other ingredient they are applied near a the left breast for heart-burn , also to the stomach for stomach-ache , and to the eyes for procidence .
The juice of them is also dropped into the ears .
Added to rose wax-salve it heals condylomata .
A decoction in wine of its tender shoots is a quick remedy for affections of the uvula .
The same shoots , eaten by themselves like cabbage sprouts , or a decoction of them in a dry wine , strengthen loose teeth .
They check looseness of the bowels and discharges of blood , and are good for dysentery .
They are dried in the shade and then burnt so that the ash may reduce a relaxed uvula .
The leaves also dried and crushed are said to be useful for sores on draught animals .
The blackberries which grow on them can furnish a better mouth-medicine than even the cultivated mulberry .
Made up on the same prescription or with hypocisthis and honey only , they are taken in drink for cholera , for heart-burn , and for the stings of spiders .
Among the medicines that are called styptics , there is none more effective than the root of a bramble bearing blackberries boiled down in wine to one third , so that sores in the mouth and the anus may be rinsed with the decoction and fomented ; so powerful is it that the very sponges used become hard as stone .
SOL A second kind of bramble , on which a rose grows , produces a little round growth like a chestnut , an excellent remedy for the stone .
It is different from the dog-rose , about which I shall speak a in the next book .
SOL The cynosbatos is called by some cynapanxis , by others neurospastos .
It has a leaf like a man 's foot-print .
It also bears a black cluster , in the berry of which it has a string , whence the whole shrub is called neurospastos .
It is different from the caper that the physicians have called cynosbatos .
The stalk of this , pickled in vinegar , is chewed as a remedy for affections of the spleen and for flatulence .
The string of it chewed up with Chian mastic cleanses the mouth .
The rose-blossom of brambles with axle-grease clears away mange ; the berries mixed with oil of unripe grapes dye the hair .
The blossom of the blackberry is gathered at harvest-time .
The white blossom taken in wine is excellent for pleurisy and also for coeliac affections .
The root , boiled down to one-third , checks looseness of the bowels and haemorrhage ; the decoction also makes a wash that strengthens the teeth .
With the same juice are fomented sores of the anus and of the genitals .
The ash from the root replaces a relaxed uvula .
SOL The Idaean bramble was so called because no other grows on Mount Ida .
It is , however , more delicate than other brambles and smaller , with the canes farther apart and less prickly ; it grows under the shade of trees .
The blossom of it with honey is applied to fluxes of the eyes and to erysipelas , and in water it is given as a drink to patients with disordered stomachs ; its other properties are the same as those mentioned above .
SOL Among the different kinds of brambles is one called rhamnos by the Greeks , paler , more bushy , throwing out branches with straight thorns , not hooked like those of other brambles , and with larger leaves .
The other kind of it is wild , darker and inclining to red , bearing a sort of pod .
A decoction of the root of this in water makes a drug called lycium .
The seed of it brings away the afterbirth .
The other , the paler kind , is more astringent , cooling , and more suitable for the treatment of gatherings and wounds .
The leaves of either kind , raw or boiled , are made up into an ointment with oil .
SOL A superior lycium is said to be made from the thorn which is also called chironian , a boxthorn , the characteristics of which I have described among Indian trees , for Indian lycium is considered by far the best .
The pounded branches and roots , which are of extreme bitterness , are boiled in water in a copper vessel for three days ; the woody pieces are then taken away and the rest boiled again until it is of the consistency of honey .
It is adulterated with bitter juices , even with lees of olive oil and with ox gall .
The froth , which may be called the flower of the decoction , is an ingredient of remedies for the eyes .
The rest of the juice is used for clearing spots from the face and for the cure of itch , chronic fluxes of the eyes and corroding sores in their corners , pus in the ears , sore tonsils and gains , cough and spitting of blood .
For these a piece the size of a bean is swallowed , or if there is discharge from wounds it is applied locally , as it is to chaps , ulcers of the genitals , excoriations , fresh , spreading and also festering ulcers , excrescences in the nostrils and suppurations .
It is also taken in milk by women for excessive menstruation .
The Indian variety is distinguished by the lumps being black outside and red inside , quickly turning black when they have been broken .
This kind is very astringent , and bitter .
It is useful for all the same purposes as are the other kinds , but especially for treating the genitals .
SOL Some think that sarcocolla is the tear-like drop of a thorn .
It is like powdered frankincense , sweet with a touch of harshness , and gummy .
It checks fluxes , and is used especially as an ointment for babies .
It too grows black with age , and the whiter it is the better its quality .
SOL There is still one famous remedy , called oporice , to be included among the medicines that are obtained from trees .
Used for dysentery and stomach troubles , it is made in the following way .
In a congius of white grape-juice are boiled down over a slow heat five quinces , seeds and all , five pomegranates , one sextarius of sorb-apples , an equal quantity of what is called Syrian sumach , and half an ounce of saffron .
The boiling continues until the consistency is that of honey .
SOL To these remedies I will add those which , because the Greeks have given the same name to different objects , we might be led to suppose came from trees .
SOL The chamaedrys (' ground oak ') is a plant whose Latin name is trixago .
Some have called it chamaerops , and others the Trojan plant .
It has leaves of the same size as mint leaves , coloured and indented as are those of the oak .
Some have called it ' saw-shaped ,' saying that it gave rise to the invention of the saw ; its blossom is almost purple .
It is cropped in rocky localities and is full of juice , being a very efficacious remedy , either by the mouth or as an ointment , for the poison of serpents , and also for disordered stomach , chronic cough , phlegm collected in the throat , ruptures , sprains and pain in the side .
It reduces the spleen , promotes menstruation , and is diuretic , being for this reason efficacious in incipient dropsy , a handful of its sprays being boiled down to one-third in a sextarius and a half of water .
It is ground in water to make lozenges for the purposes mentioned above .
With honey it also heals abscesses and chronic sores , even when foul .
There is also made from it a wine , which is useful for troubles of the chest .
The juice of the leaves with oil clears away dimness of vision ; for the spleen it is taken in vinegar .
Used also as embrocation it is warming .
SOL The chamaedaphne (' ground bay ') consists of a single small stem , about a cubit high ; the leaves are more slender than those of the bay ; the seed , of a red colour , is attached to the leaves .
It is applied fresh to the head for headache , it cools feverishness , and for colic it is taken with wine .
Its juice when taken by the mouth promotes menstruation and urine , and applied as a pessary in wool it makes easier difficult childbirth .
SOL The chamelaea (' ground olive ') has leaves which resemble those of the olive — they are bitter , however , and scented — growing in rocky places and not exceeding a span in height .
It purges the bowels , and draws away phlegm and bile ; a decoction is made of the leaves with twice the quantity of wormwood , this juice being drunk with honey .
SOL An application of the leaves also cleanses ulcers .
It is said that if anyone before sunrise says while plucking it that he does so ' to cure white spots in the eyes ,' it disperses this affection if worn as an amulet ; but that , in whatever way it is gathered , it is beneficial for the eyes of beasts of burden and of cattle .
SOL The chamaesyce (' ground fig ') has leaves like those of the lentil , and not rising above the ground .
It is found in dry and rocky localities .
Very useful for clearness of vision and for arresting cataract , an ointment prepared from it is also used most beneficially for scars , dimness of sight and films over the eyes .
Applied as a pessary on a bit of linen it soothes pains of the uterus .
Warts too of every kind are removed by an ointment made from it .
It is also beneficial for orthopnoea .
SOL The chamaecissos (' ground ivy ') is a plant with ears like those of wheat , with about five little branches and many leaves .
When in blossom it might be taken for the white violet .
The root is slender .
For sciatica three oboli of the leaves are taken in two cyathi of wine for seven days , but it is a very bitter draught .
SOL The chamaeleuce (' ground poplar ') is called by us Romans farfarum or farfugium .
It grows by the side of rivers , and has leaves like those of the poplar , but larger .
Its root is placed on live coals of cypress wood , and the fumes of it inhaled through a funnel for chronic cough .
SOL The chamaepeuce (' ground larch ') has leaf resembling that of the larch and is specific for lumbago and pains in the spine .
The chamaecyparis (' wound cypress ') taken in wine is a powerful antidote to the poisons of all serpents and scorpions .
The ampeloprason (' vine leek ') grows in vineyards , has the leaves of a leek , causes violent belching , but is an antidote for the bites of serpents .
It promotes urine and menstruation .
Taken in drink and applied externally it checks discharges of blood from the genital organ .
It is also administered to women after child-birth and for the bites of dogs .
That plant also which is called stachys bears a resemblance to the leek , but has longer and more numerous leaves , a pleasant smell and a colour verging on saffron yellow .
It is a powerful emmenagogue .
SOL Clinopodium also called cleopiceton , zopyrontion or oeimoides , is like wild thyme , ligneous , a span high , and found on rocky soils ; the flowers are arranged in a round circuit , giving the appearance of the feet of a couch .
It is taken in drink for sprains , ruptures , strangury and the bites of serpents ; the juice of a decoction is likewise employed .
SOL I shall now append some plants , wonderful indeed but not so well known , postponing more famous ones for succeeding books .
SOL Roman authorities give the name centuneulus to a plant with leaves resembling the hood of a mantle , found lying on the ground in cultivated fields , and called by the Greeks elematis .
Taken in a dry wine it is very good for arresting looseness of the bowels .
Bleeding too is arrested by this plant pounded and taken in doses of one denarius by weight to five cyathi of oxymel or warm water ; this prescription also helps the afterbirth .
SOL But the Greeks have also other kinds of clematis , one of which some call aetites , others lagioe , and others the ' slender scammony .
' It has branches two feet long , leafy , and not unlike those of scammony , except that the leaves are darker and smaller .
It is found in vineyards and cultivated fields , is eaten as salad with oil and salt , and relaxes the bowels .
With linseed it is also drunk in a dry wine by sufferers from dysentery .
The leaves with pearl barley are applied to fluxes from the eyes , a damp rag being first placed underneath .
An application draws scrofulous sores to suppuration , and then a further application with axle-grease completes the cure .
With green oil also they are beneficial for haemorrhoids , and with honey for consumptives .
Taken as a food they also promote an abundant supply of human milk , applied to the heads of babies they stimulate the growth of hair , and eaten with vinegar .
They act as an aphrodisiac .
SOL There is another clematis , called also the Egyptian , by some daphnoides and by others polygonoides , with a leaf like that of the bay ; it is long and slender , and taken in vinegar is efficacious against the bite of serpents , being specific for that of asps .
SOL It is Egypt especially that produces this clematis , and also the aron , which I have mentioned in my section on bulbs ; about it and dracontium there has been sharp controversy , for some have asserted that the two are the same .
Glaucias distinguished them by their mode of reproduction , declaring that dracontium is wild aron .
Some have called the root aron , but the stem dracontium , though the latter is a totally different plant , if at least it is the same as that called by the Romans dracunculus .
For the aron has a black root , broad and round , and much larger , large enough to fill the hand , but dracunculus a reddish one like a coiled snake , from which its name is derived .
SOL The Greeks themselves moreover have put a wide difference between the two plants .
They describe the seed of dracunculus as hot , with so foul a stench that the smell causes pregnant women to miscarry ; aron they have lauded to the skies as an excellent food , preferring however the female plant , on the ground that the male is harder , and slower to cook , adding that it clears the chest of disorders , and that dried and sprinkled in drink or made into an electuary it is diuretic and an emmenagogue , as it is also when drunk in oxymel .
They prescribed it to be drunk in sheep 's milk for ulcerated stomach and bowels ; cooked on hot ash and taken in oil they gave it for a cough .
Others boiled it in milk for the decoction to be drunk .
Thoroughly boiled it was applied by them to fluxes from the eyes , and likewise to bruises and to affected tonsils .
Glaucias injected it in oil for troublesome piles , using it with honey as an ointment for freckles .
He recommended it also as an antidote against poisons , and , prepared as for coughs , for pleurisy and pneumonia .
The seed pounded up with olive oil or rose oil is injected for earache .
Dieuches administered it , thoroughly mixed with the powder from a loaf , for coughs , asthma , orthopnoea , and the spitting of pus .
Diodotus gave it in the form of an honey electuary for consumption and complaints of the lungs , and even used it as an application for broken bones .
Applied round the sexual parts it helps delivery of all animals .
Dimness of vision and disorders of the stomach are removed by the juice of the root with Attic honey , and cough by the broth of a decoction with the addition of honey .
The juice is a wonderful remedy for ulcers of all kinds , whether corroding , cancerous , spreading , or polypus in the nostrils .
The leaves , boiled in wine and oil , are good for bums .
Taken in salt and vinegar they are a strong purge , boiled with honey they are good for dislocations , and also fresh or dried , with salt added , for gouty joints .
Hippocrates applied them , fresh or dried , with honey locally to boils .
As an emmenagogue two drachmae of the seed or root in two cyathi of wine are sufficient , and the same draught , if cleansing after delivery is not effected , also brings away the afterbirth .
Hippocrates also used the root by itself as a pessary .
It is said too that in times of plague it is healthful to take it in one 's food .
It dissipates the effects of drunkenness .
The fumes arising from it when it bums keep away serpents , especially asps , or make them so tipsy that they are found in a state of torpor .
Serpents are also kept off if the body is thoroughly rubbed with aron in oil of bay .
For this reason it is also considered beneficial for snakebites if one takes aron in a draught of dark wine .
It is said that cheese keeps very well if wrapped in leaves of aron .
SOL The dracunculus I have referred to is dug up when the barley is ripening and the moon is crescent .
Merely to have it on the person keeps away serpents .
So beneficial a draught is it said to be to those who have been bitten ; and its potency to be greater if iron does not touch the plant .
Earache too is relieved by its juice .
SOL That plant , however , which the Greeks call dracontium has been pointed out to me in three illustrations ; the first has leaves like those of beet , a thyrsus and a purple flower ; this is like the aron .
Others have pointed out a kind with a long root , which is as it were stamped and knotted , and with three stems in all , prescribing a decoction of its leaves in vinegar for the bite of serpents .
The third plant pointed out had a leaf larger than that of the cornel and a root like that of a reed , the knots on it being , they said , as many as the plant is years old , the leaves too being also equal in number .
They prescribed this plant in wine or water for snakebite .
SOL There is also a plant called the ails , which too is a native of Egypt .
It is similar to the aron , only itself and its leaves are smaller , as is also the root in particular , though it is as big as a full-sized olive .
The white kind puts out twin stems , the other kind one only .
Either is good for running sores as well as for burns , and for fistula also if a suppository made of it be inserted .
Corroding ulcers are arrested by an application of their leaves boiled in water and then beaten up with the addition of rose oil .
But there is one great marvel connected with this plant : if it touches the sexual organs of any female animal she is driven to destruction .
SOL The myriophyllon , which our people call millefolium , has a tender stem like that of fennel , with abundance of leaves , which have also given the plant its name .
It is found in marshy districts , and with vinegar makes a splendid treatment for wounds .
Iu drink it is taken for strangury , affections of the bladder , asthma , and falls from a height .
It is also very efficacious for toothache .
In Etruria the name is given to a slim meadow-plant , with many leaves at the sides like hair , and extremely beneficial for wounds ; the people declare that applied with axle-grease it unites the tendons of oxen when cut by the ploughshare and closes the wound .
SOL The pseudobunion has the leaves of the navew ; it grows into a bush about a span in height , the most esteemed being found in Crete .
For colic , strangury and pains in the sides or hypochondria doses of five or six sprays are taken in drink .
SOL The myrris , also called myrriza or myrra , is very like hemlock in stem , leaves and flower , but smaller and more slender , and not unpleasant as a food .
With wine it promotes menstruation and facilitates delivery .
It is said that it is also healthful to take it in drink in time of plague .
Given in broth it helps consumptives .
It sharpens the appetite and allays the bite of poisonous spiders .
Sores too on the face or head are cured by its juice obtained by steeping the plant in water for three days .
SOL The oenobreches has leaves like those of the lentil , but a little longer , a red flower and a small , slender root .
It grows round springs .
Dried till it is like flour , and sprinkled in white wine , it stops strangury and checks looseness of the bowels .
Rubbing with its juice mixed with oil causes perspiration .
SOL My proposed task of discussing wonderful plants suggests that I also say a few words about those that are magical .
For what plants are more wonderful than they ?
These were first brought to the notice of our part of the world by Pythagoras and Democritus , who followed as their authority the Magi .
Pythagoras declares that water is congealed by the plants coracesia and calicia ; but I find no mention of them in other authorities , nor does Pythagoras tell us anything else about them .
SOL The same authority gives the name of minyas , or corinthia , to a plant of which , he says , the decocted juice , used as a fomentation , immediately heals the bites of serpents .
He adds that if it is poured on the grass and a person happens to tread on it , or if by chance it is sprinkled on the body , inevitable death ensues ; so absolutely devilish is the poison of this plant , except that it counteracts other poisons .
SOL The same Pythagoras calls aproxis a plant whose root catches fire at a distance like naphtha ; I have spoken about it in my section on the marvels of the earth .
He also informs us that the symptoms of diseases which have attacked the human body when the cabbage a is in blossom , even though the patient has been cured , are felt to recur every time this plant blossoms ; he speaks of a similar peculiarity following diseases which have attacked when wheat , hemlock or the violet is in flower .
I am aware that this book of his is ascribed by some to the physician Cleemporus , but an ancient and unbroken tradition assigns it to Pythagoras .
Were the author anyone else , the mere fact that he has considered the result of his labour worthy of that great thinker enhances the authority of a book ; but who would believe that Cleemporus acted so , since he published other works , and that under his own name ?
SOL That Democritus was the author of the book called is a well-attested tradition ; yet in it this famous scientist , the keenest student next to Pythagoras of the Magi , has told us of far more marvellous phenomena .
For example , the plant aglaophotis , which received its name from men 's wonder at its magnificent colour , being native , he says , to the marble quarries of Arabia on the Persian side , is therefore also called marmaritis .
The Magi use it , he tells us , when they wish to call up gods .
SOL The achaemenis , he reports , is of an amber colour , leafless and found among the Taradastili of India ; criminals , according to him , if they drink it in wine , confess all their misdeeds because they suffer tortures from divers phantoms of spirits that haunt them ; he also called it hippophobas , because mares have an intense aversion to it .
SOL The theombrotion grows , says Democritus , thirty from the Choaspes , being like a peacock in its colourings and of a very fine scent .
He goes on to state that the kings of Persia take it in drink for all bodily disorders and for instability of intellect and of the sense of justice , and that it is also called semnion from the majesty of its power .
SOL Democritus goes on to mention another plant , the adamantis , a native of Armenia and Cappadocia ; if it be placed , he says , near lions they lie on their backs and wearily yawn .
The reason for the name is because the plant cannot be crushed , Ariana is given as the home of the arianis , a plant of the colour of fire .
It is gathered , he says , when the sun is in Leo , and pieces of wood soaked in oil catch fire at its touch .
SOL Democritus says that the therionarca , growing in Cappadocia and Mysia , makes all wild beasts become torpid , and that they cannot be revived unless sprinkled with the urine of a hyena .
SOL He tells us that the aethiopis grows in Meroh , that therefore its other name is the merois , that it has the leaf of the lettuce and that it is very beneficial for dropsy if taken in honey wine .
SOL The ophiusa he speaks of as growing in Elephantine , which also belongs to Ethiopia , a plant livid in colour and revolting to look at , to take which in drink causes such terrible visions of threatening serpents that fear of them causes suicide ; wherefore those guilty of sacrilege are forced to drink it .
An antidote is palm wine .
SOL The thalassaegle we are told is found along the river Indus , and is therefore also called potamaugis to drink which causes men to rave , while weird visions beset their minds .
SOL The theangelus Democritus says , grows on Mount Lebanon in Syria , on Mount Dicte in Crete , and in Babylon and Susa in Persia ; the Magi take it in drink to gain power to divine .
SOL The gelotophyllis grows in Bactria and along the Borysthenes .
If this be taken in myrrh and wine all kinds of phantoms beset the mind , causing laughter which persists until the kernels of pine-nuts are taken with pepper and honey in palm wine .
SOL According to the same authority the hestiateris is a Persian plant , so named from its promotion of good fellowship , because it makes the company gay ; it is also called protomediap from its use to gain the highest position at Court ; casignete , because it grows only in company with its own species , and not with any other plants ; also dionysonymphas , because it goes wonderfully well with wine .
SOL Helianthes is the name given to a plant with leaves like those of the myrtle , growing in the district of Themiscyra and on the mountains along the coasts of Cilicia .
A decoction of it in lion 's fat , with saffron and palm wine added , is used , he says , as an ointment by the Magi and the Persian kings to give to the body a pleasing appearance , and therefore it is also called heliocallis .
SOL The same authority gives the name hermesias to a means of procreating children who shall be handsome and good .
It is not a plant , but a compound of ground kernels of pine nuts with honey , myrrh , saffron and palm wine , with the later addition of theombrotion and milk .
He prescribes a draught of it to those who are about to become parents , after conception , and to nursing mothers .
This , he says , results in children exceeding fair in mind and body , as well as good .
Of all these plants he adds also the magical names .
SOL Apollodorus , a follower of Democritus , added to these plants one that he called aeschynomene , because on the approach of a hand it contracts its leaves , and another called crocis , whose touch , he declares , kills poisonous spiders ; Crateuas added the onothuris , by the sprinkling of which in wine he asserted that the fierceness of all animals is calmed ; and a little while ago a well-known grammarian added anacampseros , by the mere touch of which , he said , love was restored , even though the lovers parted in hatred .
These few remarks are quite enough to have been said for the present about the wonderful powers ascribed to plants by the Magi , as I shall speak of them again on a more fitting occasion .
SOL Many have described the eriphia .
It has a me beetle running up and down inside its stem , making a noise like that of a kid ; hence also comes its name .
It is said that nothing is better than this plant for improving the voice .
SOL The wool-plant given to fasting sheep produces an abundance of milk .
Equally well known generally is the lactoris , plant full of milk taste of which produces vomitings .
Some say that this is the same plant ( others say one like it ) as that called the military plant , because there is no wound made by iron which is not cured within five days by an application of it in oil .
SOL Another plant highly popular among the Greeks is the stratiotes , but it grows only in Egypt when the Nile is in flood ; it is like the aizoum , only its leaves are larger .
It is wonderfully cooling , and applied in vinegar heals wounds , as well as erysipelas and suppurations .
It also arrests haemorrhage of the kidneys in a marvellous way if taken in drink with male frankincense .
SOL A plant that grows on the head of a statue , gathered into piece taken from some garment and tied on with red thread , is said to relieve headache immediately on being applied .
SOL Any plant whatsoever , gathered before sunrise out of streams or rivers , provided that nobody sees the gatherer , if it is tied as an amulet to the left arm , is said to keep away tertian agues , provided that the patient does not know what is going on .
SOL The plant called ' tongue ' grows around springs .
Its root , burnt and pounded with pig 's fat — they add that the pig should be black and barren — cures mange if the patients use it as embrocation in the sunshine .
SOL If the plants that sprout up inside a sieve thrown away on a cross-path are plucked and used as an amulet , they hasten the delivery of lying-in women .
SOL A plant growing on the top of country dung-heaps is , if taken in water , a very efficacious remedy for quinsies .
SOL A plant near which dogs make water , if uprooted without the touch of iron , is a very quick remedy for dislocations .
SOL In my account of vine-supporting trees the tree called rumpotinus received a notice .
When it does not support a vine there grows near it a plant called by the Gauls rodarum .
It has a stem with knots , like a twig of a fig-tree ; the leaves are those of a nettle , whitish in the centre , but in course of time becoming red all over ; the blossom is silvery .
If the leaves are beaten up with old axle-grease , without being touched by iron , they are a sovereign remedy for tumours , inflammations and gatherings .
After being rubbed with it the patient spits to his right three times .
They say that the remedy is more efficacious if three persons of different nationalities do the rubbing from left to right .
SOL What is called the unfilial plant is of a hoary white , in appearance like rosemary , clothed with leaves like a thyrsus and terminating in a head , from which sprout up little branches that also terminate each in a little head of its own .
This is why the plant has been called unfilial , because the children out-top their parent .
Others have thought that it has been so named rather because no animal touches it .
Crushed between two stones this plant gives out an effervescing juice , which added to milk and wine is a sovereign remedy for pansies .
Attributed to it is this wonderful property ; that they who have tasted it are never attacked by quinsy .
Accordingly , they say , it is also given to pigs , and those refusing to swallow the medicine are cut off by that complaint .
There are some who think that a little of it is woven into birds' nests , and that this is why chicks are not choked by gulping their food too greedily .
SOL Venus' comb is so named from its resemblance to combs ; its root pounded with mallows extracts all foreign bodies lodged in the flesh .
SOL The plant called exedum dispels lethargy .
The plant notia is well known under various names in the curriers' work-shops ; I find that taken in wine or vinegar and water it is most efficacious for the sting of scorpions .
SOL Philanthropos is a name which the Greeks in witty sarcasm give to a plant because it sticks to the clothes .
A chaplet made out of it and placed on the head relieves headaches .
But what is called dog-bur , if beaten up in wine with plantain and millefolium , heals cancerous sores , the plaster being taken off every third day .
It also cures pigs , if dug up without iron ; it is added to their swill before they go to feed , or else given them in milk and wine .
Some add that as he is getting it up the digger should say : ' This is the plant argemon , which Minerva discovered to be a remedy for the pigs that shall taste of it .
' SOL Some have said that tordylon is the seed of sili , others that it is itself a plant , which they have also called syreon .
I find nothing recorded of it except that it grows on mountains , that burnt and taken in drink it promotes menstruation and expectoration , the root being even more efficacious , that its juice , swallowed in doses of three oboli , cures ill-orders of the kidneys , and that its root is also an ingredient of emollient plasters .
SOL Grass , itself the very commonest of plants , trails its knotted blades along the ground , and from them and out of the head sprout many new roots .
Its leaves in the rest of the world grow to a fine point , and only on Mount Parnassus sprout leaves thicker together than anywhere else , of the appearance of ivy , and with a white , scented flower .
To draught-cattle no other plant is more attractive , whether fresh , or dried into hay and sprinkled with water when it is given them to eat .
Its juice too , which is sweet , is said to be collected on Parnassus because of its richness .
Over the rest of the world a decoction is used in its place to close cuts ; the crushed plant by itself has the same effect and also prevents wounds from becoming inflamed .
To the decoction are added wine and honey , by some , equal parts also of frankincense , pepper and myrrh , and the whole is again boiled in a bronze vessel to make a remedy for toothache and eye-fluxes .
A decoction of the root in wine cures colic , strangury and sores of the bladder , breaking up stone .
The seed causes a stronger flow of urine , and checks looseness of the bowels and vomiting .
It is also specific for the bites of the draco .
Some prescribe nine knots either from one plant or from two or three to make up that number of joints , rolled up in black wool with the grease still in it , as a remedy for scrofulous sores and superficial abscesses .
The person gathering it , they add , ought to be fasting , and in this state he should proceed to the house of the patient while he is away , and on his appearance say three times : Fasting I give a cure to a fasting patient , and so fasten the nine joints as an amulet .
This is to be done on three days running .
The kind of grass that has seven spaces between knots makes a very effective amulet for headache .
For severe pains in the bladder some authorities prescribe a decoction of grass in wine , boiled down to one half , to be drunk after the bath .
SOL There are some who speak of three kinds of pointed grass .
When on each head there are at most five points they call it fixiger grass. ; These points plaited together they insert into the nostrils and draw them out again to cause bleeding .
The second kind , which is like the aizotim , they use with axle-grease for whitlows , hangnails , and when flesh has grown over the nails , calling it finger grass , because it heals the fingers .
There is a third kind of finger grass , but it is slender , growing on ruins or tiles .
Its properties are caustic , and it checks creeping ulcers .
Grass put round the head checks copious bleeding at the nose .
It is said that in the district of Babylon camels are killed by the grass that grows by the side of the roads .
SOL Held in no less honour is fenugreek , which is also called telis , carphos , bucerasp and aegoceras because its seed is shaped like small horns ; the Roman name for it is silicia .
The method of sowing it we have described in its proper place .
Its properties are to dry , to soften and to dissolve .
The juice of the decoction is of help in several ailments of women : whether it is hardness , swelling or contraction of the uterus , the treatment is fomentation and the sitz bath .
Injections are also of value .
It checks scaly eruptions on the face .
Splenic troubles are cured by a local application of a decoction to which soda has been added ; the decoction may also be made with vinegar .
Such a decoction is also good for the liver .
In cases of difficult childbirth Diocles prescribed an acetabulum of its crushed seed in nine cyathi of concentrated must ; three-quarters were to be drunk , then the patients were to bathe in hot water , next , as they were sweating in the bath , he gave further half of what remained , and then the rest after the bath .
In this way the maximum benefit was obtained .
A decoction in hydromel of fenugreek meal with barley or linseed was used by the same physician to make a pessary for violent pains in the uterus ; he combined this treatment with a plaster at the base of the abdomen .
He treated leprous sores and freckles with equal parts of sulphur and fenugreek meal , the skin having been prepared beforehand with soda , applying the mixture several times a day and not allowing the patient to be rubbed with it .
Theodorus treated leprous sores with fenugreek and one-fourth part of cleaned cress steeped in the strongest vinegar .
Timon prescribed as an emmenagogue a draught of half an acetabulum of fenugreek seed with nine cyathi of concentrated must and water , and there is no doubt that a decoction of it is very good for ulcerated uterus and intestines , as the seed is for the joints and hypochondria .
If , however , it is boiled down with mallows , and honey wine be afterwards added , a draught is praised as a pre-eminent remedy for troubles of the uterus and intestines , seeing that the steam also from the decoction is of the highest value ; a decoction of fenugreek , too , removes offensive smells of the armpits .
The meal with wine and soda quickly removes scurf and dandruff on the head .
A decoction too of the meal in hydromel , mixed with axle-grease , cures complaints of the genitals , likewise superficial abscesses , parotid tumours , gouty affections of feet or hands , affections of the joints and the receding of flesh from the bones ; but the meal is kneaded in vinegar for dislocations .
A decoction of the meal in vinegar and honey only is used as a liniment for splenic trouble .
Kneaded in wine it cleanses cancerous sores ; if honey is afterwards added a complete cure is effected .
A gruel also of this meal is taken for ulceration of the chest and for chronic cough .
It is boiled down for a long time until the bitterness disappears ; afterwards honey is added .
I shall now proceed to the peculiar glory of plants .
SOL
