FROM this point we are going to deal with a most important work of nature , namely to tell man his proper foods , and to force him to acknowledge that his means of living are unknown to him .
Nobody should be deceived by the meanness of the names into considering this a petty or trifling task .
Herein will be told of Nature at peace or at war with herself , along with the hatreds and friendships of things deaf and dumb , and even without feeling .
Moreover , to increase our wonder , all of them are for the sake of mankind .
The Greeks have applied the terms ' sympathy ' and ' antipathy ' to this basic principle of all things : water putting out fire ; the sun absorbing water while the moon gives it birth ; each of these heavenly bodies suffering eclipse through the injustice of the other .
Furthermore , to leave the more heavenly regions , the magnetic stone draws iron to itself while another kind of stone repels it ; the diamond , the rare delight of wealth , unbreakable and invincible by all other force , is broken by goat 's blood .
Other marvels , equally or even more wonderful , we shall speak of in their proper place .
I only ask pardon for beginning with trivial though healthful objects .
First I shall deal with kitchen-garden plants .
SOL We have said that there is a wild cucumber much smaller than the cultivated kind .
From it is made the drug called elaterium by pressing the juice out of the seed .
Unless , to prepare it , the cucumber be cut open before it is ripe , the seed spurts out , even endangering the eyes .
After being gathered , the cucumber is kept for one night and then cut open on the next day with a reed .
The seed too is kept in ash to prevent the juice from running away .
This when pressed out is received in rain water , where it falls to the bottom .
Then it is thickened in the sun , and made into lozenges for the great benefit of mankind , being good for dim vision , eye diseases and sores of the eyelids .
It is said that if the roots of vines are touched by this juice the grapes are not attacked by birds .
The root too when boiled in vinegar is used as ointment in cases of gout , and its juice cures toothache .
Dried and mixed with resin it heals impetigo , itch , what are called psora and lichen , parotid swellings and superficial abscesses ; it restores the natural colour to scars , while the juice of the leaves mixed with vinegar and poured by drops into the ears is a remedy for deafness .
SOL The proper season to prepare elaterium is the autumn , and no drug keeps for a longer period .
It begins to be potent when three years old ; if it is desired to use it earlier , the lozenges must be made less harsh by warming them in vinegar in a new clay pot over a slow fire .
The older it is the better , and it has been known to keep , so Theophrastus tells us , for two hundred years , and its power to put out the flame of a lamp it retains right up to the fiftieth year .
Indeed , the test of genuine elaterium is whether its application makes a flame flicker up and down before putting it out .
The pale smooth variety is better than the grass-green and rough , and is slightly bitter .
lit is thought that conception is aided by cucumber seed if a woman keeps it fastened to her body without its having touched the ground ; while labour is easier if , without her knowledge , the seed , wrapped in ram 's wool , be tied to her loins ; but it must be hastily carried out of the house immediately after delivery .
SOL As to this cucumber itself , those who sing its praises tell us that the best variety grows in Arabia , and the next best in Arcadia ; some report that in Cyrene grows a cucumber like the heliotrope , of the size of a walnut , appearing between the leaves and the branches ; its seed is curled back like a scorpion 's tail but white in colour .
Moreover , some call this cucumber ' scorpion ' ; both its seed and elaterium are most effective antidotes to the sting of the scorpion .
The regular dose as purge or emetic is from half to one obolus , according to the idiosyncrasy of the patient , a larger dose being fatal .
Similar are the doses when taken in drink as a remedy for phthiriasis and dropsy .
Mixed with honey or old olive oil it is used to cure quinsy and tracheal affections .
SOL Many authorities hold that this cucumber is the same as that known among us as the serpentine , and by some as the stray cucumber , a decoction of which spread over things prevents mice from touching them .
The same authorities say that a decoction of it in vinegar applied externally gives immediate relief to gout and to diseases of the joints ; that lumbago is cured by the seed dried in the sun , then pounded , and administered in doses of twenty denarii in half a sextarius of water , and that sudden tumours are cured by a liniment made by mixing it with woman 's milk .
Elaterium promotes menstruation but causes abortion when taken by women with child .
It is good for asthma and also for jaundice when I injected into the nostrils .
Smeared in the sunshine on the face , it removes therefrom freckles and spots .
SOL Many authorities assign all these qualities to the cultivated cucumbers , which even apart from cucumfret .
them is of great importance .
For instance , the seed too , a three-finger pinch of it , when pounded with cummin and taken in wine , is beneficial for coughs , for phrenitis when drunk in woman 's milk , a dose of an acetabulum for dysentery , and with an equal weight of cummin for expectoration of pus .
Taken in hydromel it is good for diseases of the liver .
With sweet wine it is diuretic , while for kidney pain it is used with cumrnin as an enema .
SOL The gourds called pepones make a very refreshing food , and are also laxative .
Their pulp is used as an application for fluxes or pains of the eyes .
The root is a cure for the hard sores , like honeycomb , which they call ceria .
It also acts as an emetic ; it is dried and pounded into flour , the dose being four oboli taken in hydromel , but after it has been drunk a walk of half a mile must be taken .
This flour is also used as an ingredient in skin-smoothing cosmetics .
The rind too serves as an emetic and clears the face of spots .
The leaves also of any kind of cultivated gourd have when applied externally the same effect .
The same , mixed with honey , also cure night rash and mixed with wine dog-bites and the bite of multipedes , an insect called seps by the Greeks .
It is rather long , with hairy legs , and is particularly harmful to cattle .
The bite is followed by swelling , the wound suppurating .
The cucumber itself by its smell revives those who have fainted .
When peeled and cooked in oil , vinegar and honey , cucumbers are , it is firmly held , more pleasant to the taste .
SOL There is also found a wild gourd , called by the Greeks σομφός , hollow inside ( whence its name ) , of the thickness of a finger , growing only in rocky soils .
If it be chewed the juice is very beneficial to the stomach .
SOL Another kind of wild gourd is called colocynthis .
The fruit is smaller than the cultivated , and full of seed .
The pale variety is more useful than the grass-green .
Taken by itself when dried it is a drastic purge .
Used also as an enema an injection is a remedy for all complaints of the bowels , of the kidneys , and of the loins , as well as for paralysis .
After the seed has been picked out , hydromel is added and boiled down to one half , which gives a very safe strength for an injection of four oboli .
The stomach is benefited also by taking pills made of the dry powder mixed with boiled honey .
In jaundice seven seeds of it are taken , to be followed immediately by hydromel .
The pulp added to wormwood and salt cures toothache , while its juice warmed with vinegar makes loose teeth firm .
Rubbed on with oil it likewise relieves pains of spine , loins and hips .
Moreover , wonderful to relate , an equal a number of its seeds , fastened to the body in a cloth , is said to reduce those fevers which the Greeks call periodic .
The warmed juice , also , of the shredded cultivated colocynthis cures earache , and its inner pulp without the seed corns on the feet , as well as the suppurations called by the Greeks άποστήματα .
The juice obtained by boiling down the whole pulp along with the seeds makes loose teeth firm and stops toothache , and a boiled mixture of it with wine stops inflammation of the eyes .
An application of the pounded leaves with fresh cypress leaves , or of the fruit alone , roasted in a clay pot , reduced to powder and added to goose grease , is a cure for wounds .
Moreover , when fresh , with shreds of its bark it cools gout and inflammations of the head , especially of babies , and erysipelas by the application to the part affected of the same shreds , or of the seeds .
The juice from scrapings , mixed with rose-oil and vinegar , makes a liniment which cools the heat of fevers .
The dust of the dried fruit applied to burns is wonderfully healing .
Chrysippus the physician disapproved of gourds as food , but there is a general agreement that they are very beneficial to the stomach , and also for ulceration of the intestines and bladder .
SOL The turnip too has its medicinal properties .
A hot application cures chilblains , besides preventing the feet from being chilled .
A hot decoction of it is good even for cold gout , and raw turnip , pounded and mixed with salt , for every ailment of the feet .
The seed , made into liniment or drunk in wine , is said to protect against snake bites and poisons ; many moreover hold that taken in wine and oil it serves as an antidote .
Democritus entirely disapproved of the turnip as a food on the ground that it causes flatulence ; Diocles , however , praised it highly , maintaining that it is also aphrodisiac .
Dionysius agrees , holding that its effect is greater when it is seasoned with rocket , and that , when roasted and made into an ointment with grease , it is good for pain in the joints .
SOL Wild turnip grows chiefly in fields ; it is bushy , with a white seed , which is twice as big as that of the poppy .
For smoothing the skin of the face or of the whole body it is used when mixed with equal parts of the meal of vetches , barley , wheat and lupins .
The root is not good for anything .
SOL The Greeks retain in pharmacology also two varieties of navews .
The one with angular leaf-stalks , and a flower like that of dill , called bunion , is beneficial for the purgings of women , for the bladder and for the urine , in the form of a decoction , drunk in hydromel , or in a drachma of the juice ; the seed , roasted and ground , taken in four cyathi of warm water , is good for dysentery .
It checks urine , however , if a linseed drink be not taken with it .
The other kind of navew is called bunias ; it is like the radish and turnip , its seed being a splendid remedy for poisons , for which reason it is also used in antidotes .
SOL We have said that there is also a wild radish .
The most popular kind is found in Arcadia , although it also grows elsewhere .
It is rather useful as a diuretic .
This is its only merit , for in other respects it is heating .
In Italy it is also called armoracia .
SOL Cultivated radishes moreover , besides what has been said about them , purge the stomach , loosen phlegm , promote urine and bring away bile .
In addition , a decoction of the skin in wine , drunk in the morning up to three cyathi , break up and eliminate gall-stones .
A decoction of the same in vinegar and water is used as liniment for the bites of serpents .
The radish too is good for a cough if taken with honey in the morning on an empty stomach ; its seed too when roasted and chewed by itself .
To use a radish as an amulet and to drink either a decoction of its leaves in water or its juice neat in doses of two cyathi is good for phthiriasis .
Good for inflammation is a liniment of radishes crushed by themselves , and for a fresh bruise a liniment made from the skin with honey .
Lethargic persons are benefited by eating them at their hottest , asthmatics by the seed , first roasted and then beaten up with honey .
Radishes are also useful for poisons , counteracting the sting of the cerastes and of the scorpion .
With hands rubbed with radish or its seed you may handle these creatures without fear , and a radish placed on scorpions kills them .
Radishes too counteract the poisons of fungi and of henbane , and moreover , as Nicander tells us , the effects of drinking bull 's blood .
Both the physicians with the name of Apollodorus prescribe radishes to be given for mistletoe poisoning ; but Apollodorus of Citium recommends the pounded seed in water , he of Tarentum the juice .
Radishes also reduce the size of the spleen , and are good for the liver and pains in the loins ; taken also with vinegar or mustard they are beneficial in cases of dropsy , lethargus , epilepsy and melancholia .
Praxagoras would administer it to patients with iliac , and Plistonicus to those with coeliae disease .
If eaten with honey they also cure ulcers of the intestines and suppurations of the chest .
Some for these purposes prefer to cook them in mud ; [ Mayhoff 's reading : ' to smear them over with mud before cooking .
'] if so taken they promote , according to them , the menstrual discharge .
Taken with vinegar or honey they bring away intestinal worms ; a decoction of them boiled down to one third , drunk with wine , is good for intestinal hernia ; so taken they draw off superfluous blood .
For these purposes and for spitting of blood Medius prescribes that they should be given cooked , as well as to women lying-in to increase the supply of milk ; Hippocrates that radishes should be rubbed on the head of women when the hair falls off , and that they should be placed on the navel for pains in the womb .
They also bring scars back to the original colour of the skin .
An application also of the seed soaked in water arrests ulcers called phagedaenae .
Democritus thinks that as a food radishes are aphrodisiac ; for this reason , perhaps , some have maintained that they are injurious to the voice .
The leaves , but only those of the long radish , are said to improve the eyesight ; should however too strong a dose of radish be applied as a remedy , they prescribe the immediate use of hyssop , for it is antipathetic .
For deafness the juice of the radish is dropped into the ear .
But , for those who would vomit , it is very useful to eat radishes after a meal .
SOL Like the parsnip is the hibiscum , which some call the wild mallow , and others πλειστολοχεία ; it is a cure for ulcers and for broken cartilages and bones .
The leaves , taken in water , relax the bowels ; they keep serpents away , and used as a liniment heal the stings of bees , wasps and hornets .
Its root dug up before sunrise is wrapped in wool of the colour called natural , taken moreover from a ewe that has given birth to a ewe lamb , and bound on scrofulous sores , even when they have suppurated .
Some think that when it is to be used for this purpose the root should be dug up with a tool of gold , care being taken not to let it touch the ground .
Celsus too prescribes a decoction of the root in wine as a liniment for cases of gout without swelling .
SOL Another kind is staphylinus , which they call stray parsnip .
Its seed , crushed and taken in wine , soothes a swollen belly , and the hysterical chokings and pains of women , to such an extent that it restores the womb to normal , benefits their abdomen , moreover , if applied in raisin wine , benefiting men also when pounded with an equal part of bread and drunk in wine as a cure for bellyache .
It is diuretic also , and if applied fresh with honey , or after being sprinkled dry on flour it stays phagedaenic ulcers .
Its root , taken in hydromel , Dieuches prescribes against affections of the liver , spleen , loins and kidneys ; Cleophantus in cases also of chronic dysentery .
Philistion boils it in milk ; for strangury he prescribes four ounces of the root , giving it in water for dropsy , likewise for those stricken by pitonitetanus , pleurisy and epilepsy .
It is said that those who carry it are not bitten by serpents , and that those who have eaten of it , if bitten , receive no hurt ; for bites it is applied with axle-grease , and its leaves are chewed as a remedy for indigestion .
Orpheus said that there is in staphylinus a love-philtre , perhaps because it is a proved fact that when eaten it is an aphrodisiac ; for which reason some have declared that by it conception is aided .
For all other purposes the cultivated kind too is powerful , but the wild plant is more efficacious , especially that growing on rocky soils .
The seed of the cultivated kind too is a cure for the sting of scorpions when taken in wine or vinegar and water .
Its root used as a dentifrice is a cure for toothache .
SOL In Syria very great pains are taken over kitchen-gardens ; hence the Greek proverb : ' Syrians have plenty of vegetables .
' They sow a vegetable called by some gingidion that is very like staphylinus , only it is slighter and more bitter , though its properties are the same .
lit is eaten , cooked or raw , with great advantage to the stomach , for it dries up all its humours , however deep these may lie .
SOL Wild ( or stray ) skirret is like the cultivated kind and has similar properties .
It stimulates the appetite , banishing distaste for food , if taken in vinegar and silphium , or with pepper and honey wine , or if you like with fish sauce .
It is both diuretic , as Ophion believes , and an aphrodisiac .
Diocles too is of the same opinion , and moreover thinks that it acts as a cordial in convalescence , or is very useful after many vomitings .
Heraclides prescribed it for mercury poisoning , for occasional impotence and in convalescence .
Hicesius said that the reason why it appeared to be harmful to the stomach was that no one could eat three skirrets in succession ; adding however that it was beneficial to convalescents who are beginning to take wine again .
The juice , especially of the cultivated variety , checks looseness of the bowels if drunk with goats' milk .
SOL Since most people confuse the two similar Greek names , σέσελι and σέσελι ( σίλι ) , we have added some account of sili or hartwort , though it is a plant generally known .
The best is that of Massilia , for its seed is broad and yellow ; the next best , the Aethiopian , is darker , and the Cretan has the strongest smell of all .
The root has a pleasant smell , and the seed , it is said , even the vultures eat .
When drunk in white wine it is beneficial to man for chronic cough , ruptures and convulsions ; likewise for opisthotonic tetanus , affections of the liver , colic and strangury , in doses of two or three spoonfuls .
The leaves also are useful because they aid parturition , even that of quadrupeds ; it is said that does , when about to give birth , make this their special food .
The leaves are also applied to erysipelas , and digestion is much helped if the leaf or seed be eaten after food .
It arrests also looseness of bowels in quadrupeds , either pounded and mixed with their drink , or chewed up when they eat their food .
It acts as a cure for diseases of oxen , if taken with salt or pounded and injected .
SOL Elecampane too chewed by people fasting strengthens the teeth .
If it is taken from the ground so as not to touch it , a confection of it is healing for a cough ; the juice moreover of the boiled root expels worms , and dried in the shade its powdered form cures cough , convulsions , flatulence and affections of the trachea .
It keeps off the bite of poisonous creatures .
An application of the leaves steeped in wine is used for lumbago .
SOL There are no wild onions .
Cultivated onions , by the running caused by the mere smell , is a cure for feebleness of vision ; an even better cure is to apply to the eye some of the juice .
Onions are also said to induce sleep , and chewed with bread to heal sores in the mouth ; fresh onions applied in vinegar , or dry with honey and wine , dog-bites , provided that the bandage is taken off three days after .
Applied in the same way they also heal abrasions .
An onion cooked in ash many have applied with barley flour to fluxes of the eyes , and to sores of the genitals .
The juice of onions they used as ointment for eyesores , albugo and argema with honey for serpent bites and all kinds of ulcers , with woman 's milk for sore ear-laps , and dropped it into them with goose grease or honey for singing or hardness of hearing .
Diluted with water it was prescribed for those suddenly smitten with dumbness .
In toothache it was poured by drops into the mouth to rinse the teeth ; likewise on to wounds made by any wild beasts , especially to those of scorpions .
In mange and itch crushed onions have been rubbed on the places affected .
Boiled onions were given to eat to those affected by dysentery or lumbago ; onion-peelings burnt to ash were applied in vinegar to serpent bites , and onions themselves in vinegar for those of the multipede .
Apart from what has been said , there are remarkable differences of opinion among physicians .
The latest opinion holds that they are injurious to the viscera and the digestion , causing , it is said , flatulence and thirst .
The school of Asclepiades holds that , used as food , onions promote a healthy complexion , and , if they are eaten daily on an empty stomach , preserve a good state of health , are useful to the stomach , loosen the bowels by putting the air in motion , disperse haemorroids when used as a suppository , and the juice , added to that of fennel , is very beneficial in cases of incipient dropsy ; added to rue and honey it is used for quinsy , and for dispelling lethargus .
Varro is our authority that an onion steeped in salt and vinegar , and then dried , is not attacked by worms .
SOL Cutleek stops bleeding at the nose if the nostrils be plugged with leek pounded , or mixed with gall-nut or mint ; fluxes also after miscarriage are arrested by drinking the juice with woman 's milk .
It cures chronic cough , and affections of the chest and lungs .
By an application of the leaves are healed pimples , burns and epinyctis — is called a sore , also known as syce , in the corner of the eye and perpetually running ; some give the same name to livid pustules causing restlessness at night a ... and other sores by leeks pounded with honey ; the bites of beasts are treated by leek in vinegar , as are those of serpents and other poisonous creatures .
Affections of the ears , however , are treated by leeks and goats , gall , or else leeks and mead in equal proportions .
With woman 's milk leeks are used for singing in the ears ; for headache the juice is poured into the nostrils , or two tablespoons of juice with one of honey are poured into the ears at bedtime .
The juice also is drunk with neat wine to counteract the bites of serpents and of scorpions , and a draught can be taken with half a sextarius of wine for lumbago .
For spitting of blood , moreover , for consumption , and for chronic catarrhs the juice is beneficial , as is also the leek by itself eaten as food ; for jaundice , dropsy and kidney pains an acetabulum of the juice mixed with barley-water .
The same dose taken with honey purges the womb .
Leek moreover is eaten to counteract the poisons of fungi ; it is applied to wounds , is an aphrodisiac , quenches thirst , serves as a pick-me-up after drunkenness , but is said to dim the eyesight , and to cause flatulences which do no harm , however , to the stomach but relax the bowels .
Leeks impart brilliance to the voice .
SOL Headed leek has the same properties as cutleek , but they are stronger .
Those who spit blood are given its juice along with ground gall-nut or frankincense , or with gum arabic .
Hippocrates directs it also to be given without other ingredient , and is of opinion that a contracted womb opens under its influence ; likewise that by its use as food the fertility of women is increased .
Beaten up , with honey added , it cleanses sores .
Cough , catarrh of the chest , and affections of the lungs and of the trachea are cured by it when given in a draught of barley-water or eaten raw , the head excepted , without bread ; it must however be taken only on alternate days , even if pus be expectorated .
Given thus it greatly benefits the voice , venery and sleep .
The heads , boiled in water that is twice changed checks diarrhoea and chronic fluxes ; a decoction of the skin serves as a dye for grey hair .
SOL Garlic has powerful properties , and is of great benefit against changes of water and of residence .
It keeps off serpents and scorpions by its smell , and , as some have maintained , every kind of beast .
It cures bites when drunk or eaten , or applied as ointment , being particularly efficacious against the haemorrhoids when taken with wine and brought up by vomiting .
Lest we be surprised that it is an antidote against the poisonous bite of the shrewmouse , it neutralizes aconite , which is also known by the name of pardalianehes [' Panther-strangler .
'] as well as henbane and dog-bites ; for the wounds of the latter it is made into an ointment with honey .
For the bites of serpents it is very efficacious to roast it with its own leaves and make a liniment by adding oil ; also for bruises on the body , even if they have swollen into blisters .
Moreover , Hippocrates thinks that garlic fumigations bring away the afterbirth ; by its ash mixed with oil he used to restore to health running sores on the head .
To asthmatics it is given cooked , though some have given it raw .
Diocles prescribed it wit centaury for dropsy , or in a split fig as a purge , a more efficient one being fresh garlic taken in neat wine with coriander ; pounded garlic too has by some been given in milk to asthmatics .
Praxagoras again mixed it with wine as a remedy for the jaundice , and with oil and pottage for passion ; the latter prescription he also used as a liniment for scrofula .
The ancients used also to give it raw to madmen , Diocles gave it well boiled for phrenitis .
Pounded and , drunk with vinegar and water it is useful as a gargle for quinsy .
By three pounded heads with vinegar toothache is relieved , as it is by rinsing the teeth with a decoction , and inserting garlic itself into the hollow teeth .
Garlic juice , mixed with goose-grease , is also dropped into the ears .
Garlic , in drink or injected with vinegar and soda , checks phthiriasis and scurf , catarrhs likewise if boiled with milk , also beaten up or mixed with soft cheese ; it relieves hoarseness also if taken thus , or in gruel of peas or beans .
On the whole , however , it is more useful cooked than raw , boiled than roasted .
Thus prepared it is also more beneficial to the voice .
When cooked in oxymel it expels tapeworms and other parasites of the intestines ; in pottage it cures tenesmus .
Well boiled it is used as ointment for pains in the temples ; cooked , and then beaten up with honey , it makes an ointment for blisters .
For a cough a decoction is taken with stale grease , or with milk ; or if there be also spitting of blood or pus , it is roasted under live ashes and taken with an equal part of honey .
For sprains and ruptures it is used with salt and oil .
With fat , however , it cures suspected tumours .
Mixed with sulphur and resin it draws the pus from fistulas , with pitch extracting even arrows .
Leprous sores , lichen and freckly eruptions are cleansed and cured by it and wild marjoram , or by a liniment made out of its ash with oil and fish-sauce .
Used in this way it is also good for erysipelas .
Burnt to ash and mixed with honey it brings back to the original colour parts that are black-and-blue or livid .
It is believed that epilepsy too is cured by garlic taken in food and drink , and that one head of it , taken in a dry wine with an obolus of silphium shakes off a quartan ague .
Taken in another way , namely boiled in broken beans and eaten with food until health is restored , it cures a cough , and suppuration of the chest , however severe .
It induces sleep also , and makes the body generally of a ruddier colour .
It is believed to act as an aphrodisiac , when pounded with fresh coriander and taken in neat wine .
Its drawbacks are that it dulls the sight , causes flatulence , injures the stomach when taken too freely , and creates thirst .
In addition , mixed with emmer-wheat and added to their food it is good for poultry to save them from the pip .
Beasts of burden are said to pass urine without pain , if their parts are treated with pounded garlic .
SOL The chief kind of lettuce growing wild is the one called goat-lettuce , which when thrown into the sea kills immediately all the fish in the neighbourhood .
Its milk , or juice , when thickened and then added to vinegar , in doses of two oboli to one cyathus of water , is prescribed for dropsical patients .
The crushed stalk and leaves , sprinkled with salt , cure a cut sinew .
The pounded plant and vinegar , used as a mouthwash twice a month in the morning , keeps away toothache .
SOL There is a second kind , called caesapon by the Greeks , the pounded leaves of which , made into an ointment with pearl-barley , heal sores .
These two grow in the open fields .
A third kind growing in woods is called ίσάτις .
Its leaves pounded up with pearl-barley are good for wounds .
A fourth kind is used by dyers of wools .
Its leaves would be like those of wild sorrel , were they not more numerous and darker .
By its root or leaves it stanches bleeding , heals phagedaenic and putrefying ulcers , spreading ulcers , tumours before suppuration , and erysipelas .
Taken in drink it is good even for the spleen .
Such are the peculiar properties of the several kinds .
SOL The characteristics , however , common to the wild kinds are whiteness , a stem occasionally a cubit long , and a roughness on the stalk and on the leaves .
Of these kinds , one with round , short leaves is called by some hieracion ( hawkweed ) , since hawks , by tearing it open and wetting their eyes with the juice , dispel poor vision when they have become conscious of it .
The juice in all of them is white , in its properties , also , like that of the poppy ; collected at harvest by cutting the stem , it is stored in new earthenware , being excellent for many purposes .
With woman 's milk it heals all eye-diseases — white ulcers , films , all wounds and inflammations , and especially dimness of sight .
It is also applied to the eyes on wool for fluxes .
The same juice purges the bowels if drunk in vinegar and water in doses not exceeding two oboli .
Drunk in wine it heals snakebites , as do its leaves and stalks when pounded and drunk in vinegar .
They are applied as ointment to a wound , especially for the stings of scorpions ; for those , however , of venomous spiders wine and vinegar are added .
They also neutralise other poisons , except those which kill by suffocation , or those which hurt the bladder , white lead also being an exception .
They are applied to the belly with honey and vinegar to clear away troubles of the bowels .
The juice corrects difficulty in making water .
Cratenas prescribes it also for dropsy in doses of two oboli with vinegar and a cyathus of wine .
Some collect the juice of the cultivated lettuce also , but it is less efficacious .
The special properties of lettuces , besides those already mentioned a of causing sleep , checking sexual desire , cooling a heated body , cleansing the stomach and making blood , are not few ; it breaks up flatulence , calms belching , aids digestion without ever itself causing indigestion .
No other article of diet has a greater power of both increasing appetite and also of diminishing it .
In either case moderation of the amount taken is the reason ; thus an immoderate amount loosens the bowels , while a moderate amount binds them .
Lettuces loosen thick phlegm , and , as some have put on record , clear the senses , being very useful to stomachs which are out of order .
They are aided for these purposes by oboli of digestive , the mixer modifying the sharpness by the addition of a sweet wine until it is no greater than that of vinegar sauce , mixing with it , if the phlegm be thick , squill or wormwood wine ; if a cough also be experienced , hyssop wine .
Lettuces are given with wild endive for coeliac affections and for hardness in the abdomen .
White lettuce in great quantity is given to melancholic patients and for bladder troubles .
Praxagoras gave it also to patients with dysentery .
It is good for fresh burns , if applied with salt before the blisters form .
They cheek spreading ulcers , if applied at first with saltpetre , afterwards in wine .
Pounded they are applied in cases of erysipelas .
The pounded stalks , added to pearl-barley and applied with cold water , soothe cramps and sprains , and eruptions of pimples when applied with wine and pearl-barley .
In cholera also they have been given cooked in a pan , for which purpose the most beneficial are the bitter ones with the largest stems .
Some people too inject the lettuce milk .
Their stalks thoroughly boiled are said to be very beneficial to the stomach ; likewise for sleep the summer lettuce especially , and the milky , bitter kind , which we have called meconis .
This milk added to woman 's milk is prescribed also as very useful for clearness of vision if the eyes and the head are bathed in good time , and likewise for eye troubles caused by chill .
I find much other extravagant praise of lettuce : that with Attic honey it is as good as southernwood for chest complaints ; that menstruation is regulated by its use as food ; that the seed of cultivated lettuce is given for scorpion stings ; that the crushed seed taken in wine prevents libidinous dreams ; that noxious waters do not harm those who eat lettuce .
Some however have maintained that when eaten too often they impair the eyesight .
SOL Not without healing properties is either kind of beet ; the fresh root of either the white variety or of the dark , if soaked and hung on a cord is said to be efficacious against serpent bites ; white beet boiled and taken with raw garlic against tapeworms .
Dark roots boiled in water remove dandruff ; the dark for all purposes is held to be the more efficacious .
Its juice relieves headache and giddiness , noises in the ears if poured into them , and it is diuretic .
Injected it is a remedy for dysentery and jaundice ; the juice used as liniment relieves toothache , besides being an antidote for serpent bites , but only if extracted from the dark root .
A decoction , moreover , of the beet itself relieves chilblains .
White beet applied to the forehead allays fluxes of the eyes , and mixed with a little alum , erysipelas .
Similarly applied , when beaten up without oil it also heals burns .
It is also used for eruptions of pimples ; again , when boiled , it is applied to spreading sores , likewise raw for mange , and for running sores on the head .
Its juice applied with honey to the nostrils clears the head .
It is gently boiled with lentils , with vinegar added , in order to relax the bowels .
Boiled faster beet checks fluxes of the stomach and bowels .
SOL There is also a wild beet , called by some limonium , by others neuroides , with leaves much smaller , thinner and closer together , often having eleven stalks .
Its leaves , useful for burns , dry the mouth of those who taste them .
Its seed , in doses of one acetabulum , is good for dysentery .
The liquid moreover decocted from the root of the beet washes out , it is said , the stains on clothes as well as those on parchment .
SOL Endives also are not without their value in medicine .
Their juice with rose oil and vinegar relieves headache ; moreover , drunk with wine , pains of the liver and bladder ; it is also applied to fluxes from the eyes .
The wild endive certain among us have called ambubaia .
In Egypt they call the wild kind cichorium ; the cultivated they call seris , a variety which is smaller and has more veins .
SOL Chicory taken in food or applied as liniment cools gatherings .
The juice of the boiled-down vegetable loosens the bowels , and benefits liver , kidneys and stomach .
Again , if it is boiled down in vinegar it dispels pain of urination , jaundice also if taken in honey wine , provided that there is no fever .
It helps the bladder .
Boiled down in water it so helps the purgation of women as even to withdraw the dead unborn baby .
The Magi add that those who have anointed themselves with the juice of the entire plant , mixed with oil , become more popular , and obtain their requests more easily .
So great indeed are its health-giving properties that some call it chreston ( useful ) others pancration ( almighty ) .
SOL The wild kind — some call it hedypnois has a broader leaf ; boiled , it acts as an astringent upon a relaxed stomach , and eaten raw it checks looseness of the bowels .
It is beneficial in dysentery , more so when taken with lentils .
Ruptures and cramps are relieved by both kinds , as also are those troubled with a diseased flux of sperm .
SOL Seris also , itself very similar to lettuce , is of two kinds .
The wild is the better ; it is dark and grows in summer , while the winter variety , which is whiter , is not so good .
Each is bitter , and very beneficial to the stomach , especially to one troubled by a humour .
They are cooling when taken with vinegar in food , and when applied as liniment ; they disperse other humours besides those in the stomach .
With pearl-barley the roots of the wild variety are taken in a draught to benefit the stomach ; for heartburn they are applied above the left breast ; prepared with vinegar all these are useful for gout , for spitting of blood , and likewise for fluxes of sperm , a dose to be taken on alternate days .
Petronius Diodotus , who wrote a medical Herbal , gives many arguments condemning seris altogether , but the opinion of all others is against him .
SOL It would be a long task to make a list of all the praises of the cabbage , since not only did Chrysippus the physician devote to it a special volume , divided according to its effects on the various parts of the body , but Dieuches also , and Pythagoras above all , and Cato no less lavishly , have celebrated its virtues ; the views of the latter it is meet to set forth all the more carefully for the sake of learning what medicine the Roman people used for six hundred years .
The earliest Greeks divided cabbage into three varieties ; ( a ) the curly , which they called selinas from the resemblance of its leaves to those of parsley , useful for the stomach and moderately laxative ; ( b ) the helia , with broad leaves growing out of the stem , from which some have called it caulodes , of no importance in medicine ; ( c ) the third , crambe properly so-called , with thinner leaves of plain shape and very close together , is more bitter but very beneficial .
Cato thinks most highly of the curly variety , next after it approving the smooth cabbage with large leaves and big stem .
He considers it good for headache , dimness of the eyes and sparks in them , for the spleen , the stomach and the hypochondria , when taken raw in the morning with oxymel , coriander , rue , mint and root of silphium , in doses of two acetabula , saying that their power is so great that he who pounds the ingredients together feels himself growing stronger .
He therefore recommends that it should either be pounded with these herbs when taken in a draught , or at least be in sauce made from them ; while for gout and rheumatic joints a liniment should be made with a dash of rue , coriander and salt , along with barley flour ; he adds that its water , boiled down , is wonderfully beneficial for sinews and joints , if they are fomented with it .
Wounds , whether fresh or old , and even cancerous sores , which can be healed by no other treatment , should , so he prescribes , first be fomented with hot water and then have pounded cabbage applied to them twice daily .
Similar treatment he prescribes for fistulas also and sprains ; for tumours too , both such as must be brought to a head and those that need to be dispersed .
He says that boiled cabbage prevents dreams and sleeplessness , if you eat fasting as much as possible with oil and salt ; gripings it relieves if after boiling it is boiled down again with the addition of oil , salt , cummin and pearl-barley .
If when so prepared it is taken without bread , it will , he adds , be more beneficial .
Among other things he tells us that bile is cleared away by drinking cabbage in dark wine ; and what is more , he recommends that the urine of a person who has lived on a cabbage diet should be kept , because when warmed it is a cure for pains in the sinews .
I will add his actual words to explain his thought : ' Little boys , if you bathe them with such urine , never become weak .
' He also advises that the juice of cabbage should be poured warm into the ears , with wine added , and he insists that this treatment benefits those who are hard of hearing , and that impetigo by the same means is cured without ulceration .
SOL Just because we have dealt with Cato it is well to put down now the views of the Greeks also , limiting ourselves to making good Cato 's omissions .
If not overcooked they think that cabbage brings away bile , also that it loosens the bowels , checking diarrhoea however if it be boiled twice .
As cabbage is the enemy of the vine , they say that it opposes wine ; that if taken in food beforehand it prevents drunkenness , taken after drinking it dispels its unpleasant effects .
They hold that cabbage taken as food greatly brightens the vision , and that the benefit is very great indeed if the juice of raw cabbage and Attic honey merely touch the corners of the eyes .
They add that cabbage is very easily digested , and that its use as food clears the senses .
The school of Erasistratus loudly declares that nothing is more useful than cabbage for the stomach and sinews , and he therefore prescribes it for paralysis and palsy , as well as for spitting of blood .
Hippocrates prescribed twice-boiled cabbage and salt for coeliac trouble and dysentery , also for tenesmus and kidney troubles , holding also that its use as food gave a rich supply of milk to lying-in women and benefited women 's purgings .
The stalk indeed eaten raw brings out the dead unborn baby .
Apollodorus holds that its seed should be eaten , or its juice drunk , to counteract poisonous fungi ; Philistion prescribes it to be taken in goat 's milk , with salt and honey , for opisthotonic tetanus .
I find that gout has been cured by eating cabbage and drinking cabbage water ; the latter has been given with the addition of salt for heart-bum also and epilepsy , and with white wine for a period of forty days for diseases of the spleen , as well as for jaundice and phrenitis .
For hoarseness he prescribes the juice of the raw cabbage as a gargle or drink , but for hiccoughs he recommends it to be taken in vinegar with coriander , dill , honey and pepper .
An application of it is good for flatulence of the stomach , snake bite and putrid sores of long standing ; if you like , the mere water may be used with barley meal , the juice in vinegar or with fenugreek .
In this way some apply it to aching joints and gouty limbs .
An application of it relieves epinyctis and every other kind of spreading eruption , and also sudden dimness of sight ; the last too is benefited by eating it in vinegar , but for bruises and other livid marks the application should be of cabbage alone , for leprous sores and itch , of cabbage in vinegar with a ball of alum .
Applied in this way it also prevents the hair from falling out .
Epicharmus says that a local application of cabbage is very good for troubles of the testes and genitals , that cabbage and crushed beans are more efficacious still , and likewise for convulsions ; that with rue it relieves high fever and stomach troubles , and with the seed of rue it brings away the afterbirth and cures the bite of the shrewmouse .
The dried leaves when powdered purge by vomit or by stool .
SOL Of all the varieties of cabbage the most pleasant-tasted is cyma , although it is thought to be unwholesome , being difficult of digestion and bad for the kidneys .
Further , we must not forget that the water in which it has been boiled , though praised for its many uses , has a foul smell when poured out on the ground .
The ash of dried cabbage-stalks is understood to be caustic , and with stale grease is used for sciatica , but with silphium and vinegar , applied as a depilatory , it prevents the growth of other hair in place of that pulled out .
It is also taken lukewarm in oil , or boiled in water by itself , for convulsions , internal ruptures , and falls from a height .
Has cabbage then no faults to be charged with ?
Nay , we find in the same authors that it makes the breath foul and harms teeth and gums .
In Egypt too , because of its bitterness , it is not eaten .
SOL Cato gives vastly higher praise to the wild , or stray , cabbage , so much so that he asserts that the mere powder of the dried vegetable , collected in a smelling-bottle , or the scent only , snuffed up the nostrils , removes nose-troubles and any offensive odour .
Some call this variety rock-cabbage ; it is strongly antipathetic to wine , so that the vine tries very hard to avoid it , or , if it cannot do so , dies .
It has thin leaves , round , small , and smooth ; though rather like the ordinary vegetable , it is both whiter and more hairy than the cultivated kind .
Chrysippus tells us that it heals flatulence , biliousness and fresh wounds , if applied with honey and not removed till the seventh day ; also that beaten up in water it cures scrofula and fistulas .
Others moreover maintain that it checks running sores , called nomae , removes too excrescences , and smoothes away scars ; that if it is chewed , or if cabbage water be used with honey as a gargle , sores in the mouth or on the tonsils disappear , as also do the itch and chronic leprous sores , if three parts of it and two of alum in strong vinegar be applied as a liniment .
Epicharmus thought this cabbage a sufficient remedy if applied to the bite of a mad dog , and an even better one with the addition of silphium juice and strong vinegar ; he also said that dogs are killed by it , if given with their meat .
Its seed if roasted is a help against serpents , fungi , and bull 's blood .
The boiled leaves taken in food or applied raw with sulphur and soda relieves splenic diseases and also hardness of the breasts .
The ash of its roots even by a mere touch cures a swollen uvula , reduces parotid swellings if applied with honey , and heals bites of serpents .
Of the power of cabbage I will add but one proof , which is both striking and wonderful : let the scale form on the inside of any vessel in which water is boiled , so that it cannot be scraped away ; yet it disappears if cabbage is boiled in them .
SOL Among wild cabbages is also lapsana , which is a foot high , has hairy leaves , being like mustard , except that the flower is whiter .
It is eaten cooked , and soothes and relaxes the bowels .
SOL Of all the varieties , sea cabbage is the strongest purgative .
On account of its pungency it is cooked with fat meat , and is very bad for the stomach .
SOL The squill used in medicine is white ( the dark squill is female ) , and the whiter it is the more beneficial .
When the dried skin has been torn from it , what is left of the living a plant is cut up and hung on a cord at short distances .
Afterwards the dry pieces are plunged still hanging into a jar of very strong vinegar , so as not to touch any part of the vessel .
Then the jar , plastered with gypsum , is placed under tiles which receive the sun the whole day long .
This is done forty-eight days before the solstice .
After this number of days the vessel is removed and the squills taken out , the vinegar being poured into another vessel .
This vinegar sharpens the vision , is beneficial for pains of the stomach and sides if taken for two days at a time .
But so great is its strength that too copious a draught produces for a moment the appearance of death .
Even when chewed by themselves squills are good for the gums and teeth .
Taken in vinegar and honey they bring away tapeworm and other intestinal parasites .
Fresh squills placed under the tongue prevent dropsical patients from suffering thirst .
They are cooked in several ways : either in a pot lined with fat or clay , to be put into an oven or furnace , or else they are cut up and cooked in a stewpan .
Raw squills too are dried , then cut up , boiled in vinegar and then applied to snake bites .
Another way is to roast the squills and then clean them , after which the centre parts are again cooked in water .
Thus prepared they are used for dropsy , as a diuretic , drunk with honey and vinegar in doses of three oboli , and also for diseases of the spleen and stomach , when food floats undigested , provided that no ulceration is felt , for griping pains , jaundice , and chronic cough with asthma .
Scrofula is cleared away by squill leaves , if they are left on for four days ; dandruff and running sores by an application of squills cooked in oil .
Cooked too in honey squills are used as food , especially to promote digestion .
So prepared they also purge the bowels .
Cooked in oil and mixed with resin squills heal cracks in the feet .
The seed mixed with honey is applied to relieve lumbago .
Squills too , hung in a doorway , are said by Pythagoras to have power to keep off evil enchantments .
SOL The other bulbs cure cuts on the face when used with vinegar and sulphur , contraction of the sinews too when pounded up and used by themselves , dandruff when mixed with wine , and the bites of dogs when mixed with honey ; Erasistratus would mix them with pitch .
The same authority holds that applied with honey they stop a flow of blood .
Others add coriander and flour for bleeding at the nose .
Theodorus treats lichen also with bulbs in vinegar , adding a dry wine or egg for eruptions on the head .
The same authority applies them for eye-fluxes , and their centres for dry ophthalmia .
Red bulbs in particular , applied in the sun with honey and soda , remove spots on the face , and freckles when applied with wine or with vinegar .
They are wonderfully good too for wounds , either by themselves , or as Damion advises , with honey wine , if the application be allowed to remain for four days at least .
By the same means he treats broken ear-laps and hydrocele , adding flour also for pains in the joints .
Boiled in wine and applied to the belly they soften hardness abdomen .
For dysentery they are given in diluted with rain-water , for internal spasms in the size of a bean compounded with silphium .
sweating they are bruised and applied .
They good for the sinews , and therefore are given to paralytics .
Red bulbs , mixed with honey and salt , heal sprains of the foot very quickly .
Megarian bulbs are a strong aphrodisiac ; garden bulbs taken with concentrated must or raisin wine help delivery ; wild bulbs compounded with silphium and swallowed in pills relieve intestinal wounds and affections .
The seed of the last is taken in wine against the bite of venomous spiders .
The bulbs themselves are applied in vinegar against the bites of serpents .
The ancients used to give the seed in drink to persons raving mad .
The flowers of bulbs pounded up remove spots on the legs and patches produced by fire .
Diocles thinks that the eyes are weakened by them .
He adds that when boiled they are less useful than roasted , and that according to the strength of every variety they are difficult of digestion .
SOL The Greeks call bulbine a plant with leaves like those of leeks and with a red bulb .
This is said to be wonderfully good for wounds , provided that they are recent .
The bulb called the emetic from its effects has dark leaves , longer than those of other kinds .
SOL Asparagus is reported to be one of the most beneficial foods to the stomach .
Indeed if cummin is added it disperses flatulence of the stomach and colon ; it improves vision also , moves the bowels gently , benefits pains in the chest and spine as well as intestinal trouble , wine being added when it is being cooked .
For pains in the loins and kidneys asparagus seed is taken in drink in doses of three oboli , an equal quantity of cummin being added .
It is aphrodisiac and very useful as a diuretic , except when the bladder has been ulcerated .
Very many recommend that the root be pounded and taken in white wine , when it also disperses stone , and relieves pains of the loins and kidneys .
Some also prescribe this root to be taken in sweet wine for pain in the womb .
This root boiled down in vinegar is good for elephantiasis .
If a man is rubbed with a mixture of pounded asparagus and oil it is said that he is never stung by bees .
SOL Wild asparagus is called by some corruda , by others Libyan , by the Attics orminus .
For all the purposes mentioned above its properties are more efficacious than those of the cultivated asparagus , and those of the whiter kind are the more powerful .
Both relieve jaundice .
As an aphrodisiac , the water in which it has been boiled is recommended to be drunk in doses up to a hemina .
Its seed has the same effect mixed with dill and taken in doses of three oboli of each .
A decoction of the juice is also given for the bites of serpents .
Its root , mixed with the root of fennel , is among our most efficacious aids .
In cases of haematuria the seed of asparagus , of parsley , and of cummin is prescribed by Chrysippus in doses of three oboli in two cyathi of wine .
He goes on to say that thus prepared , although it is diuretic , yet it is bad for dropsy , as it is for venery , and also for the bladder unless it is boiled in water ; that this water kills dogs if they drink it ; that the juice of the root boiled in wine , if it be held in the mouth , cures toothache .
SOL Parsley is universally popular , for sprigs of it are found swimming in draughts of milk everywhere in the country , and in sauces it enjoys a popularity all its own .
Moreover applied with honey to the eyes , provided that they are also frequently fomented with a warm decoction , it is wonderfully beneficial , as also for other fluxes on the limbs , when applied pounded up , either by itself or with bread or pearl-barley .
Fish also , if they are sickly in ponds , are revived by fresh parsley .
But no other plant taken from the ground has caused such a variety of opinion among the learned .
Parsley shows distinction of sex .
Chrysippus says that female parsley has hard and curlier leaves , a thick stem and a sharp , hot taste , Dionysius that it is darker , has a shorter root and breeds grubs ; both agree that neither should be classed among the foods — nay , that it is altogether a sin to eat parsley , because it is dedicated to the funeral feasts in honour of the dead , and that it is also bad for the eyesight .
They say that the stem of female parsley breeds grubs , and because of this those who have eaten it , whether male or female , become barren , and actually that sucking babies become epileptic if their nurses have eaten parsley .
The male plant however they say is the less injurious .
This is why it is not classed among plants utterly taboo .
The application of parsley leaves softens hardness of the breasts .
To boil parsley in it makes water sweeter to drink .
The juice of the root in particular added to wine relieves lumbago , and hardness of hearing if the same liquid be dropped into the ears .
The seed is diuretic , aids the menses and the afterbirth , and restores bruises to their natural colour if they are fomented with a decoction of the seed .
Applied with white of egg , or boiled in water and drunk , parsley cures kidney troubles , and ulcers in the mouth when pounded up in cold water .
The seed with wine , or the root with old wine , breaks up stones in the bladder .
The seed is also given , in white wine , to jaundice patients .
SOL Hyginus gives the name of apiastrum to melissophyllum , but by general consent the Sardinian variety is condemned as poisonous ; I must however include in the same class all plants so placed by Greek writers .
SOL Olusatrum ( alexanders ) , also called hipposelinum ( horse parsley ) , is antipathetic to scorpions .
Its seed taken in drink cures colic and intestinal worms .
The seed too , boiled and drunk in honey wine , cures dysuria .
Its root , boiled in wine , expels stone , besides curing lumbago and pains in the side .
Taken in drink and applied as liniment it cures the bite of a mad dog .
A draught of its juices warms those who have been chilled .
A fourth kind of parsley is made by some authorities out of oreoselinum ( mountain parsley ) , a straight shrub a palm high , with a seed like cummin , beneficial to the urine and the menses .
Heleoselinum ( marsh celery ) is especially valuable for the bites of spiders ; this variety and oreoselinum taken in wine promotes the menses .
SOL Another kind of parsley , which grows on rocks , is called by some petroselinum ( rock parsley ) ; it is especially good for abscesses , two spoonfuls of the juice making a dose with one cyathus of juice of horehound and three cyathi of warm water .
Other authorities have added to the parsleys buselinem ( cow parsley ) , which differs from the cultivated kind in the shortness of its stalk and the redness of its root , although its properties are the same .
They add that taken in drink or applied it is a powerful antidote against the bites of serpents .
SOL Ocimum ( basil ) too was severely condemned by Chrysippus as injurious to stomach , urine and eyesight , adding that it causes madness , lethargus and liver troubles , and that for this reason goats refuse to touch it , so that men also ought to avoid it .
Certain authorities add that pounded ocimum , if covered by a stone , breeds a scorpion , and that ocimum chewed and left in the sun breeds worms ; the Africans moreover hold that a man 's life is lost if he is stung by a scorpion on the same day as he has eaten ocimum .
Moreover , some hold that if a handful of ocimum be pounded up with ten sea or river crabs , all the scorpions in the neighbourhood are drawn to it .
Diodorus in his Empirica says that the use of ocimum as a food breeds lice .
The period that followed saw strong defenders of ocimum who said that goats do eat it , that no man 's mind has been affected by it , and that in wine and a little vinegar it cures the stings of land scorpions and the venom of those in the sea .
Experience also proves , they say , that ocimum if smelt in vinegar is good for fainting ; also for lethargus , and to cool inflammations ; for headache , too , if used as a liniment with rose oil or with myrtle oil or with vinegar , and for eye fluxes if applied in wine .
It is said too , to be beneficial to the stomach , to disperse flatulence by belching if taken in vinegar , to check looseness of the bowels if applied externally , to be diuretic , applied thus to be good for both jaundice and dropsy , and to check even the diarrhoea of cholera .
Philistion therefore prescribed ocimum even for coeliac complaints and when boiled for dysentery ; some against the advice of Plistonicus prescribe it in wine for tenesmus , spitting of blood and hardness of the hypochondria .
Applied to the breasts it checks the flow of milk .
It is very beneficial , especially with goose grease , for the ears of babies .
The pounded seed snuffed up the nostrils promotes sneezing , and used as a liniment the flow of mucus from the head ; taken as food in vinegar it purges the womb .
Mixed with cobbler 's blacking it removes warts .
Being aphrodisiac it is also administered to horses and asses at the time of service .
SOL For all these purposes wild ocimum is of greater efficacy , particularly for the troubles caused by frequent vomitings and for abscesses of the womb , the root taken in wine being very efficacious for the bites of wild beasts .
SOL Rocket seed cures the poisons of scorpions and of the shrewmouse ; it keeps off all the little parasites breeding on the body , and removes spots on the skin of the face when applied with honey , freckles when applied with vinegar , reducing livid scars to whiteness when mixed with ox-gall .
Taken in wine it is said to harden as it were the feeling of those about to be flogged .
As a seasoning for dishes it imparts such a pleasant flavour that the Greeks have called it cuzomon ( good broth ) .
It is thought that if the eyes are fomented with slightly pounded rocket , clearness of vision is restored ... the coughing of babies is soothed .
A decoction of its root in water extracts broken bones .
We have already spoken of rocket as an aphrodisiac ; if three leaves of wild rocket plucked with the left hand and pounded are drunk in hydromel , they so act .
SOL On the other hand cress is antaphrodisiac , but as we have already said sharpens the senses .
There are two varieties of it .
The white acts as a purge , and carries bile away if one denarius by weight of it be taken in seven of water .
It is an excellent cure for scrofula if applied with bean meal and covered with a cabbage leaf .
The other kind , which is darker , purges away peccant humours of the head , clears the vision , calms if taken in vinegar troubled minds , and benefits the spleen when drunk in wine or eaten with a fig , or a cough if taken in honey , provided that the dose be repeated daily and administered on an empty stomach .
The seed in wine expels all parasites of the intestines , more effectively however if there be added wild mint .
Taken with wild marjoram and sweet wine it is good for asthma and cough , and a decoction in goat 's milk relieves pains in the chest .
Applied with pitch it disperses superficial abscesses ; applied in vinegar it extracts thorns from the body and removes spots .
When used for carcinoma white of egg is added .
It is applied in vinegar to the spleen , but with babies it is best applied in honey .
Sextius adds that burnt cress keeps away serpents , and neutralizes scorpion stings ; that the pounded plant relieves headache , and mange , if mustard be added ; that pounded and placed with fig on the ears it relieves hardness of hearing , and tooth ache if its juice be poured into the ears ; and that dandruff and sores on the head are removed if the juice be applied with goose grease .
Boils it brings to a head if applied with leaven .
It makes carbuncles suppurate and break , and with honey it cleanses phagedaenic ulcers .
With pearl barley it is applied in vinegar for sciatica and lumbago , likewise for lichen and rough nails , because its nature is caustic .
The best kind , however , is the Babylonian ; the wild variety for all the purposes mentioned is the more efficacious .
SOL But among our chief medicinal plants is rue .
The cultivated kind has the wider leaves and the more bushy branches ; the wild variety is harsh in its effects and sharper in all respects .
The juice is extracted by pounding with a moderate sprinkling of water , and is kept in a copper box .
An overdose of this juice possesses poisonous qualities , especially in Macedonia near the river Aliaemon .
Strangely enough , it is neutralized by the juice of hemlock ; so there are actually poisons of poisons , and hemlock juice is good for the hands and face of those who gather rue .
Further , rue , especially the Gallic variety , is one of the chief ingredients of antidotes .
Any sort of rue , however , is even by itself a powerful antidote , the pounded leaves being taken in wine , especially against aconite and mistletoe ; likewise , whether given in drink or in food , against poisonous fungi .
In like manner it counteracts the bites of serpents , seeing that weasels , when about to fight with them , first protect themselves by eating rue .
Rue is good for stings of scorpions and for those of spiders , bees , hornets and wasps , for injuries caused by cantharides and salamanders , and for the bites of mad dogs .
The juice is drunk in wine in doses of one acetabulum , and the leaves pounded or chewed are applied with honey and salt , or after boiling with vinegar and pitch .
It is said that any besmeared with its juice , and even those having it on their persons , are never stung by these poisonous creatures , and that serpents avoid the fumes that come from burning rue .
Its most efficient form is the wild root taken with wine .
Authorities add that this root is more efficacious if the draught be taken out of doors .
Pythagoras divided rue also into ( a ) male , with smaller leaves and of a grass-green colour , and ( b ) female , with more luxuriant leaves and more colour .
He also thought it injurious to the eyes , wrongly , since engravers and painters use rue as food , with bread or cress , for the sake of their eyes ; wild goats also , they say , cat it to improve their vision .
Many have dispelled dimness by anointing the eyes with its juice added to Attic honey or to the milk of a woman who has just borne a male child , or even by touching the corners of the eyes with the pure juice .
Rue applied with pearl barley relieves fluxes from the eyes ; taken in wine or applied with vinegar and rose oil , headaches likewise ; if however the headache be chronic , barley flour and vinegar should be the other ingredients .
The same plant soon relieves indigestion , flatulence and chronic pains of the stomach .
It opens the womb , and corrects displacement of it , if applied in honey to the whole abdomen and chest ; added to figs and boiled down to one half it is administered in wine in cases of dropsy .
In this form it is also taken for pains in the chest , sides and loins , for coughs and asthma , for complaints of the lungs , liver and kidneys , and for cold shivers .
To prevent the after-effects of drinking a decoction of the leaves is taken before indulgence in wine , It is beneficial as a food , raw , boiled or preserved , likewise for colic if boiled in hyssop and taken with wine .
In this form it checks internal haemorrhage , and , if injected into them , bleeding nostrils ; this form is also good for rinsing the teeth .
The juice is also poured into the ears for earache , care being taken , as we have said , to inject only a moderate quantity if the wild variety is used ; but for hardness of hearing and for singing in the ears there is added rose oil or bay oil , or else wine and honey .
For phrenitis too the juice of pounded rue is poured in vinegar over the temples and cranium .
Some have also added wild thyme and bay , rubbing with this mixture the head and the neck .
Rue has been given in vinegar for sufferers from lethargus to smell , and a decoction of the juice for epileptics to drink in doses of four cyathi ; it has been given before attacks of fever with unbearable chill , and also raw , as food , to sufferers from shivering fits .
It is diuretic also , even when there is haematuria ; it promotes too menstruation , and brings away the afterbirth and the foetus that has died before delivery , as Hippocrates holds , if it be taken in sweet , dark wine , or so applied locally .
He also prescribes fumigation with rue to stimulate the womb .
Diocles so applies it in vinegar and honey with barley meal for heartburn : for severe colic , the meal should be boiled in oil and spread over pieces of fleece .
Many moreover also think that two drachmae of dried rue and one and a half drachmae of sulphur can be taken for purilent spittings , and for spitting of blood three sprays boiled in wine .
Pounded and taken in wine with cheese it is also given to patients with dysentery .
Crumbed into a draught it has also been given with bitumen for shortness of breath ; for heavy falls three ounces of seed with one pound of oil and a sextarius of wine .
The leaves boiled with oil ate applied to parts that have been bitten by frost .
If it is diuretic , as Hippocrates holds , it is strange that some prescribe it as an antidiuretic drink for incontinence of urine .
An application of rue , with honey and alum , heals itch and leprous sores ; vitiligo also and warts , scrofula and similar complaints , with nightshade , lard and beef suet ; in vinegar and oil , or white lead , erysipelas ; in vinegar , carbuncles .
Some prescribe the addition of silphium to the ointment , without using it , however , for the treatment of night pustules .
A decoction of it is applied to swollen breasts , and with the addition of wax for outbursts of phlegm ; for fluxes of the testicles , however , tender sprigs of laurel are added , and so extraordinary is the effect of these on the abdomen that , it is said , by an ointment of the wild variety with old axle-grease hernia is healed , as are also broken limbs by an application of the pounded seed and wax .
The root of rue applied to the part affected restores to normal blood-shot eyes , and scars or spots on any part of the body .
Of the other traditions about rue a remarkable one is that , although it is agreed that rue is by nature hot , yet a bunch of rue boiled in rose oil with one ounce of aloes checks the perspiration of those who have rubbed themselves with it , and that its use as food hinders the generative powers .
Accordingly it is prescribed for spermatorrhoea and for frequent amorous dreams .
Pregnant women must take care to exclude rue from their diet , for I find that the foetus is killed by it .
Of all plants rue is the one most generally used for the diseases of quadrupeds also , whether it be difficulty of breathing or the bites of noxious creatures ; it is injected through the nostrils in wine , or in vinegar if a bloodsucker has been swallowed ; in any type of illness it is compounded as in the corresponding illness in man .
SOL Mentastrum is wild mint , differing from the cultivated kind in the appearance of its leaves , which have the shape of those of ocimum and the smell of pennyroyal , for which reason some call it wild pennyroyal .
If these leaves are chewed and applied , elephantiasis is cured , as was discovered in the time of Pompeius Magnus by the chance experiment of some one who for shame smeared his face with them .
The same leaves are applied , or taken in drink , for the bites of serpents , in doses of two drachmae in two cyathi of wine , for the stings of scorpions with salt , oil and vinegar ; for the wound of the scolopendra the juice of a decoction is used .
The leaves are dried to a powder and kept as an antidote for all poisons .
Spread out or burnt , the plant drives away even scorpions .
Taken in drink it brings on menstruation , but it kills the foetus .
For ruptures , spasms , orthopnoea , cholic and cholera it is very beneficial , and an external application is so for lumbago and gout .
The juice is injected into ears that are infected with parasites .
It is taken in drink for jaundice , and applied as ointment for scrofula ; it prevents amorous dreams , and if taken in vinegar expels worms ; for dandruff , vinegar with the plant in it is poured over the head in the sun .
SOL The smell of mint by itself refreshes our spirits and its flavour gives a zest to food ; for this reason it is a familiar ingredient in our sauces .
By itself mint prevents milk from turning sour or curdled and thick ; for which reason it is added to milk for drinking , and administered in water or in honey wine to such as are choked by a curdled draught .
Through the same property it is believed to be a hindrance to generation by not allowing the genital fluids to thicken .
Bleeding it checks in both men and women , and stays menstruation ; violent disturbance of the bowels also , if taken in water with starch .
Ulceration and abscess of the womb are healed by an external application , liver complaints by doses of three oboli in honey wine , spitting of blood by the same in broth .
It is wonderfully good for curing sores on children 's heads ; it dries a wet and braces a dry trachea , in honey wine and water it clears away purulent phlegm , and benefits the voice , if its juice be taken just before a strain is put upon it , not otherwise ; a gargle also of the juice added to rue and coriander in milk is good for a swollen uvula .
With alum it is good for the tonsils , with honey for a rough tongue , and by itself for internal spasms and for lung complaints .
With pomegranate juice , as Democritus tells us , it stops hiccough and vomitings .
The juice of fresh mint , inhaled , is good for affections of the nostrils .
Pounded by itself mint is good for cholera , taken in a draught of vinegar , for internal fluxes of blood , made into a plaster with pearl barley , for iliac trouble also and tension of the breasts .
It is also applied to the temples for headache , and it is taken for the wounds caused by the scolopendra , sea scorpion and serpent .
It is applied to fluxes of the eyes , to all eruptions on the head , and to rectal troubles .
It prevents too chafing , even if only held in the hand .
Added to honey wine it is poured into the ears .
It is even said to cure splenic trouble if it be tasted in the garden , without plucking it , if he who bites it says on nine consecutive days that he is curing his spleen ; also that a three-finger pinch of the dried powder taken in water relieves stomach ache , and that the same with a sprinkling of drink expels intestinal worms .
SOL Pennyroyal and mint are strong allies in reviving people who have fainted , both being put , in whole sprays , into glass bottles full of vinegar .
For this reason Varro declared that a garland of pennyroyal was more suited to our bedrooms than one of roses , for an application is said to relieve headache ; moreover , its very smell protects the head , so it is reported , against injury from cold or heat , and from thirst , nor do they suffer from the heat who carry when they are in the sun two sprays of pennyroyal behind their ears .
It is also applied with pearl barley and vinegar for pains .
The female plant is the more efficacious .
This has a mauve flower , but the male a white one .
Taken in cold water with salt and pearl barley it checks nausea ; in this form pains in the chest also , and in water by itself pains in the stomach .
Likewise it checks gnawings and vomiting if taken with vinegar and pearl barley ; in salt , vinegar and pearl barley it loosens the bowels .
Boiled with honey and soda it cures complaints of the intestines ; in wine it is diuretic , and if the wine be Aminaean it disperses both stone and all internal pains .
In honey and vinegar it relieves menstruation and the afterbirth , replaces displaced uterus and expels the dead foetus .
Its seed is given to smell in cases of aphasia ; to epileptics it is administered with vinegar in doses of one cyathus .
If unwholesome water has to be drunk , pounded pennyroyal is sprinkled on it .
It relieves physical tiredness if taken in wine ; it is rubbed with salt and vinegar on the sinews , and when these are contracted , and with honey for opisthotonic tetanus .
A decoction is drunk for serpent bites ; pounded it is taken in wine for stings of scorpions , especially if the pennyroyal be grown on dry soil .
It is supposed to be good for ulcerations of the mouth , and for cough .
The flower of the freshly gathered plant , when burnt , kills fleas by its smell .
Xenocrates includes in his prescriptions the administering of a sprig of pennyroyal wrapped in wool to be smelt by sufferers from tertian ague before an attack of fever , or its being placed under the bedclothes for the patient to lie on .
SOL Wild pennyroyal has for the same purposes as I have mentioned yet more beneficial properties .
It is like wild marjoram , has smaller leaves than cultivated pennyroyal , and by some is called dictamnos ( dittany ) .
Its taste incites sheep or goats to bleat ; for this reason certain Greeks changing one letter only have named it bleehon .
Its nature is so heating that it raises a blister on the parts of the body to which it is applied .
It does a chill good for the patient to be rubbed with pounded pennyroyal before a bath , as well as before the shivering fit of attacks of ague .
For convulsions and gripings of the bowels , and for gout , it is wonderfully efficacious ; for cramps it is administered as a drink with honey and salt ; in lung troubles it makes expectoration easier .
Taken with salt it is beneficial for splenic trouble , bladder , asthma and flatulence ; a decoction of it , quite as well as the juice , replaces displaced uterus , and is an antidote for the wound inflicted by scolopendra , whether land or sea variety , by scorpions , and especially for the bite of a man .
Its root is most efficacious when fresh for spreading ulcers , but the dried root restores scars to their natural state .
SOL There is likewise kinship between pennyroyal and catmint .
Boiled down to one third in water they disperse chills , help menstruation and allay the heats of summer .
Catmint also has power to counteract the poisons of serpents .
The smoke and smell of burning catmint drives them away ; so those about to sleep in fear of snakes had better place catmint under the bedclothes .
The pounded plant is applied to lachrymal fistula , and the fresh plant with one third part of bread mixed in vinegar is used as a liniment for headache .
The juice of it dropped into the nostrils when thrown back stops bleeding at the nose ; the root likewise , which with myrtle seed makes in warm raisin-wine a gargle that heals quinsy .
SOL There is also a wild cummin , a very slender plant with four or five serrated leaves , but , like the cultivated variety , of great use , especially as a remedy for stomach trouble .
Pounded and taken with bread , or drunk in water and wine , it dispels phlegms and flatulence ; pipings also and pains in the bowels .
All cummin , however , produces paleness in those who drink the draughts .
At least it is reported that the followers of Porcius Latro , a distinguished teacher of rhetoric , imitated by this means the pallor that had followed his close application to study ; and not so long ago Julius Vindex , the famous supporter of freedom against Nero , flattered in this way the hopes of legacy-hunters .
Applied in the form of lozenges or fresh in vinegar it arrests bleeding at the nose ; applied by itself it is good for fluxes from the eyes , and applied with honey it is good for them when swollen .
For babies it is sufficient for it to be placed upon the abdomen .
For jaundice it is administered in white wine after bathing .
Ethiopian cummin is given chiefly in vinegar and water , and in an electuary with honey .
The African variety is thought to have the special quality of checking incontinence of urine .
Cultivated cummin , parched , and beaten up in vinegar , is given for troubles of the liver , likewise for vertigo ; pounded moreover it is given in sweet wine to those who smart from too acrid urine ; for disorders of the womb , in wine , and besides with an application of the leaves wrapped up in wool ; for swollen testes it is parched and pounded , and applied with honey or with rose oil and wax .
For all these purposes wild cummin is more efficacious ; moreover with oil it is so for bites of serpents , and for stings of scorpions and scolopendras .
A three-finger pinch in wine checks vomiting and nausea .
For colic also it is drunk , or applied hot in lint kept in its place by bandages .
Taken in wine it opens up suffocations of the womb , the dose being three drachma of cummin in three cyathi of wine .
It is poured into the ears with veal suet or honey , when there are noises or ringing in them .
For bruises it is applied with honey , raisins and vinegar , for black freckles in vinegar .
SOL There is a plant very like cummin which the Greeks call ami .
Some authorities however consider that it is Ethiopian cummin .
Hippocrates called it royal cummin , doubtless because he thought that it was more efficacious than the Egyptian .
Most people think that it is of an entirely different nature from cununin , because it is thinner and whiter .
Yet its use is similar to that of cummin , for it is put under loaves of bread at Alexandria and included among the ingredients of Alexandrian sauces .
It dispels flatulence and griping , promotes urine and menstruation , relieves bruises and fluxes of the eyes , and taken in wine with linseed in doses of two drachmae it is good for the wounds of scorpions , and with an equal proportion of myrrh it is especially good for the bite of the cerastes .
Like cummin it produces pallor in the complexion of those who drink it .
A fumigation of it with raisins or resin acts as a purge upon the womb .
It is believed that those women more easily conceive who smell the plant during sexual intercourse .
SOL I have said enough about the caper in the treatment of foreign plants .
The caper growing overseas is not to be used ; that of Italy is less harmful .
They say that those who eat capers daily run no risk of paralysis or of pains in the spleen .
Its root , pounded and rubbed on the skin in the sun , removes white eruptions .
The skin of the root is good for troubles of the spleen if it be taken in wine in doses of two drachmae , but the patient must give up the use of the bath ; it is said that in thirty-five days by urine and by stools the whole spleen is brought away .
It is given in drink for lumbago and paralysis .
Toothache is eased by pounded caper-seed in vinegar , by a decoction of it , or by chewing the root .
Boiled in oil it is injected for earache .
The sores called phagedaenic are cured by leaves or freshly gathered root applied with honey .
In this form the root removes scrofula ; boiled In water it removes parotid tumours and worms .
For pains in the liver it is pounded and applied with barley meal .
It also cures diseases of the bladder .
In vinegar and honey it is also given for tapeworm : A decoction in vinegar removes sores in the mouth .
Authorities agree that the caper is harmful to the stomach .
SOL Lovage — some call it panaces — is good for the stomach , likewise for convulsions and flatulence .
Some have called it ox cunila , but wrongly , as I have pointed out .
SOL Besides the cultivated cunila there are several other kinds used in medicine .
The one called ox cunila has a seed like that of pennyroyal which is curative if chewed and applied to wounds provided that the bandage is not taken off till the fifth day after .
For the bites of serpents it is taken in wine and applied to the wound after being pounded .
The bites made by serpents they rub ... likewise tortoises that are going to fight with serpents .
Certain people call it panacea ( all-heal ) in this connection .
It relieves tumours and troubles of the male organs , applied dry or after pounding the leaves ; for every use it combines wonderfully well with wine .
SOL There is another , called chicken cunila by Romans , Heracleotic marjoram by the Greeks .
Pounded and with the addition of salt it is good for the eyes .
It relieves a cough also and liver complaints , pains in the side when mixed into a broth with meal , oil and vinegar , but especially the bites of serpents .
SOL There is a third kind , which the Greeks call male cunila , and the Romans cunilago ; it has a foul smell , wood-like root and a rough leaf .
Of all varieties of cunila it is said that this has the strongest qualities , that a handful of it thrown about attracts all the cockroaches in the whole house , that taken in vinegar and water it is a specific against scorpions , and that if a man be rubbed over with three a leaves in oil serpents are kept away .
SOL On the other hand the cunila called soft has shaggier and prickly branches , and when pounded the smell of honey , the fingers sticking together at its touch ; a second variety smells of frankincense , and we have called it libanotis .
Either kind in wine or vinegar is an antidote against the bites of serpents ; furthermore , pounded and scattered about in water both varieties kill fleas .
SOL Cultivated cunila too has its uses .
The juice with rose oil is good for the ear-laps , and it is taken by itself in drink for stings .
From it grows the mountain variety , which is like wild thyme and efficacious against the bites of serpents .
It is diuretic and cleanses after childbirth .
Wild or cultivated it is a wonderful stimulus to digestion and to the appetite , or relieves indigestion taken fasting and sprinkled in a drink .
Useful too for sprains , taken in barley meal with vinegar and water it is very useful for the stings of wasps and the like .
Other kinds of libanotis will be dealt with in their proper place .
SOL Piperitis , which I have also called siliquastrum , is taken in drink for epilepsy .
Castor gave a further description of it : a red , long stem , with its knots close together ; leaves like those of the bay ; a white , small seed , with a taste like pepper ; good for the gums , teeth , sweetness of breath and for belching .
SOL Origanum , which rivals cunila in its wild flavour , as I have said has many varieties useful in medicine .
One is onitis , called by some prasion , and not unlike hyssop .
Its special use is to be taken in warm water for gnawings of the stomach and indigestion , and in white wine for the stings of spiders and scorpions , while it is applied on wool with vinegar and oil for sprains and bruises .
SOL Goat origanum is more like wild thyme .
Diuretic , it disperses tumours ; if taken in drink it is most efficacious for poisoning by mistletoe or by viper bites , for acid belchings from the stomach and for the hypochondria .
With honey it is also given for coughs , pleurisy and pneumonia .
SOL Heraclium too has three varieties .
The darker one with the broader leaf is glutinous ; the second variety , with a more slender leaf , is more tender and not unlike sampsuchum , which some prefer to call prasion .
There is a third kind , intermediate between the other two , but less efficacious than either .
The best kind , however , is the Cretan , which also has a pleasant smell , the next best that of Smyrna , having less smell , and the Heracleotic , called onitis , is more useful for drinking .
All kinds are used to keep away serpents , are given to eat boiled to those who have been bitten , are diuretic when taken in drink as above , cure with the root of all-heal ruptures and convulsions , dropsy with fig or with hyssop boiled down to one sixth in doses of one acetabulum , likewise itch , prurigo and psoriasis , if given on going down to the bath .
Its juice , with woman 's milk , is poured into the ears .
It cures the tonsils also and uvula , as well as sores on the head .
Boiled , and taken in wine with ashes it neutralizes the poison of opium and gypsum .
A dose of one acetabulum loosens the bowels ; it is applied to bruises , and also for toothache , importing whiteness to the teeth when used as a dentifrice with honey and soda .
It checks bleeding at the nose .
For parotid tumours it is boiled down with barley meal , for a rough trachea pounded with gall-nut and honey , and its leaves with honey and salt are good for the spleen .
Boiled with vinegar and salt , and taken in small doses it loosens thick , black phlegm .
Beaten up with oil it is poured into the nostrils for jaundice .
Tired bodies are rubbed with it , care being taken not to touch the abdomen .
With pitch it cures epinyctis ; with a roasted fig it brings boils to a head .
It is good for scrofulous swellings if applied with oil , vinegar and barley meal , if with fig , for pains in the side , pounded and applied in vinegar for fluxes of blood from the genitals , and also for bringing away more thoroughly the afterbirth .
SOL Dittander ( pepperwort ) is considered to be one of the caustic plants .
So it clears the complexion , but produces sores on the skin , which , however , are easily cured with wax and rose oil .
Thus used , it always removes leprous sores and psoriasis easily , as well as the sores left by scars .
It is said that in cases of toothache , if it be attached to the arm on the side where the pain is , this is diverted to it .
SOL Git is by some Greeks called melanthium , by others , melaspermon .
The best has the most pungent smell and the darkest colour .
It cures the wounds of serpents and of scorpions .
I find that it is applied in vinegar and honey , and that by burning it serpents are kept away .
A dose of one drachma also is taken in drink for the wounds of spiders .
Pounded , and smelt in a piece of linen it stops running from the nose , and headaches if applied in vinegar ; poured into the nostrils with iris juice it cures fluxes and swellings of the eyes , toothache when boiled with vinegar , ulcers in the month when pounded or chewed ; likewise leprous sores and freckles when added to vinegar , difficulty of breathing when taken in drink with soda , and indurations , chronic swellings and suppurations , when used as liniment .
It increases the flow of women 's milk if taken daily for a few days .
Its juice is collected in a similar way to that of henbane , and like it is poisonous if taken in too large doses , a fact more remarkable because the seed actually makes a most pleasant seasoning for loaves of bread .
It cleanses the eyes also , is diuretic and an emmenagogue .
Moreover , I find that merely by tying thirty grains to the body in a piece of linen , the afterbirth is brought away .
It is also said that pounded and applied in urine it cures corns on the feet , and that fumigation with it kills gnats as well as flies .
SOL Anise too is taken in wine for the stings of scorpions , being one of the few remedies specially praised , whether raw or boiled , by Pythagoras .
Green also or dried , it is valued for all such foods as require seasoning or sauce ; it is also put under the bottom crust of a loaf .
Placed with bitter almonds on the strainers it improves wine .
Moreover , the breath is made more pleasant and bad odour removed if anise be chewed in the early morning along with alexanders and a little honey , the mouth being afterwards rinsed with wine , it makes the face look younger .
It relieves sleeplessness if hung on the pillow , so that it may be smelt by the sleepers .
It sharpens the appetite , to do which has been added to the arts by luxury , ever since the craving for food ceased to come from toil .
For these reasons some have called anise anicetum .
SOL The most esteemed variety is the Cretan ; next comes the Egyptian .
This in seasoning takes the place of lovage .
To burn it and inhale the fumes through the nostrils relieves headache .
Evenor recommends its pounded root to be applied to fluxes of the eyes ; Iollas recommends a similar application of the plant itself with saffron and wine ; by itself , with only pearl barley added , he prescribes it for violent fluxes and for extraction of anything which has got into the eyes .
Applied in water it also removes a cancerous growth in the nostril .
Used as a gargle with hyssop and honey in vinegar it relieves quinsies ; it is poured with rose oil into the ears ; phlegm in the chest is cleared away by parched anise taken with honey .
For a cough it is better to pound up in honey fifty bitter almonds , peeled , with an acetabulum of anise .
A remedy very easy indeed to make consists of three drachmae of anise and two of poppy mixed with honey and divided into pieces of the size of a bean , the dose being three daily .
Its chief value , however , is to cause belching , and so it cures flatulence of the stomach , griping of the intestines and coeliac trouble .
Boiled , and either smelt or drunk , it also stays hiccough .
Its boiled leaves are a remedy for indigestion .
To smell the juice of the plant boiled with celery a stops sneezing .
Taken in drink it promotes sleep , disperses stone , stays vomiting and swelling of the hypochondria , besides being very useful for chest troubles and for the sinews with which the body is girt .
It is good for headache also to pour in drops upon the head the juice of anise boiled with oil .
Nothing is considered to be more beneficial to the belly and intestines , and so it is given roasted for dysentery and for tenesmus .
Some add opium also , pills of the size of a lupine-seed being swallowed three times a day and washed down in a cyathus of wine .
Dieuches used the juice also for lumbago ; the pounded seed with mint he gave for dropsy and coeliac trouble ; Evenor gave the root also for diseases of the kidneys .
Dalion the herbalist prescribed a poultice of anise and parsley for women in labour , and also for pain in the womb ; he recommended it to be taken with dill in drink by women in labour .
It is applied also in cases of phrenitis , sometimes freshly gathered and with pearl barley ; it is also so applied to babies suffering from epilepsy or convulsions .
Pythagoras indeed declares that no epileptic fit occurs while anise is held in the hand , and for this reason advises that as much as possible be planted near the home .
He also says that to smell it makes for easier childbirth , and that immediately after delivery it should be given in a draught with a sprinkling of pearl barley .
Sosimenes used it in vinegar for all indurations and for fatigue , boiling it in oil after adding soda .
He guaranteed travellers less fatigue if they took anise seed in drink .
For flatulence of the stomach Heraclides gave in honey-wine a three-finger pinch of the seed with two oboli of beaver oil , and in like manner for flatulence in the belly or intestines and for orthopnoea a three-finger pinch of the seed , the same quantity of henbane , and asses' milk added .
Many advise that those intending to take an emetic should during the dinner take it in water by acetabula of anise and ten pounded bay leaves .
It relieves suffocation of the womb , if it be chewed and applied warm , or if it be taken with beaver-oil in oxymel .
A dose of a three-finger pinch of cucumber seed and of the same quantity of linseed , in three cyathi of white wine , dispels vertigo after childbirth .
For quartan agues Tlepolemus used a three-finger pinch of the seed of anise and fennel , taken in vinegar and one cyathus of honey .
Applied with bitter almonds it relieves diseases of the joints .
There are some who believe that its nature neutralizes the poison of asps .
Diuretic , it quenches thirst , is an aphrodisiac , promotes with wine a gentle perspiration , and also protects clothes from moths .
It is more efficacious always when fresh and the darker it is , yet it injures the stomach except when there is flatulence .
SOL Dill too causes belching and relieves griping ; it arrests diarrhoea .
Its roots in water or wine are applied for fluxes from the eyes .
To smell its seed when boiling checks hiccoughs .
Taken in water it relieves indigestion .
Its ash relieves an inflamed uvula , but weakens the eyes and the powers of generation .
SOL The sacopenium which grows in our country is quite unlike that which comes from overseas .
The latter , also called sagapemon , resembles ammoniac gum .
It is good for pains in the sides and in the chest , for convulsions , for chronic coughs and expectoration , and for swellings of the hypochondria .
It cures also vertigo , palsy , opisthotonic tetanus , diseases of the spleen and loins , and violent chills .
It is given in vinegar to be smelt in cases of suffocation of the womb .
In other cases it is both given in drink and with oil used as an embrocation .
It is also useful as an antidote to harmful drugs .
SOL Of the cultivated poppy I have mentioned three kinds a and I promised to describe other kinds , those of the wild poppy .
Of the cultivated poppy the calyx itself of the white kind is pounded and is taken in wine to induce sleep .
The seed cures elephantiasis .
From the dark poppy a soporific is obtained by making incisions in the stalk , when the buds are forming ( as Diagoras advises ) , or when the flowers are falling ( as Iollas recommends ) , at the third hour of a clear day , that is to say , when the dew on the plant has dried up .
They recommend that the incision be made beneath the head and calyx , and in no other variety either is an incision made into the head itself .
Both this juice and that of any other plant is gathered in wool , or if there be but little , by scratching it off , as it is from lettuce , with the thumb nail , doing the same on the following day to any that has since become drier .
Poppy juice however being copious thickens , and squeezed into lozenges is dried in the shade ; it is not only a soporific , but if too large a dose be swallowed the sleep even ends in death .
It is called opium .
In this way , we are told , died at Bavilum in Spain the father of Publius Licinius Caecina , a man of praetorian rank , when an unbearable illness had made life hateful to him , and so also several others .
For this reason a great controversy has arisen .
Diagoras and Erasistratus have utterly condemned it as a fatal drug , forbidding its use moreover in injections on the ground that it is injurious to the eyesight .
Andreas has added that the only reason why it does not cause instantaneous blindness is because it is adulterated at Alexandria .
Afterwards , however , its use was not disapproved of in the form of the famous drug called διά κωδυών ( diacodion ) .
The seed too pounded into lozenges with milk is used to induce sleep , also with rose oil for headache ; with rose oil too it is poured into the ears for earache .
As a liniment for gout it is applied with woman 's milk ( the leaves by themselves are also so used ) , likewise in vinegar for erysipelas and wounds .
I myself , however , should disapprove of its addition to eye salves , and much more to what are called febrifuges , digestives and coeliacs ; the dark poppy , however , is given in wine for coeliac trouble .
All kinds of cultivated poppy are larger than the wild .
The heads are round , while those of the wild are long and small , though for all purposes more effective .
The poppy is boiled and the liquid drunk for sleeplessness , with the same water the face is fomented .
The best poppies grow on dry soils , and where the rainfall is slight .
When the heads themselves and the leaves are boiled down , the juice is called meconium , and is much weaker than opium .
The chief test of opium is its smell , that of pure opium being unbearable ; the next best test is to put it in a lamp , when it should burn with a bright , clear flame , and smell only when it has gone out ; adulterated opium does not behave in this fashion .
Adulterated opium is also harder to light , and is continually going out .
A further test of pure opium is by water , on which it floats as a light cloud , while the impure gathers into blisters .
But especially wonderful is the fact that pure opium is detected by the summer sun .
For pure opium sweats and melts until it becomes like freshly gathered juice .
Mnesides thinks that opium is best kept by adding .
the seed of henbane , others by putting it in beans .
SOL Intermediate between the cultivated poppy and the wild is a third kind , for though growing on cultivated land it is self-sown ; we have called it rhoeas or roving poppy .
Some gather it and eat it straight away with the whole calyx .
It acts as a purge ; five heads boiled in three heminae of wine also induce sleep ... SOL Of the wild poppy one kind is called ceratitis .
Black-seeded , a cubit high , with a thick root covered with a hard skin , it has a little calyx curved like a little horn .
Its leaves are smaller and thinner than those of the other wild varieties .
The seed is small , ripening at harvest ; half an acetabulum of it , taken in honey wine , acts as a purge .
The pounded leaves with oil cure eye-ulcers of beasts of burden .
Its root , in the proportion of one acetabulum to two sextarii of water , boiled down to one half , is given for complaints of the loins and liver .
Its leaves applied in honey are a cure for carbuncles .
This variety is called glaucion by some and paralium by others , for it grows within reach of the sea breezes or in alkaline soils .
SOL A second variety of wild poppy is called heradium , by others aphron , having leaves , if you look at it from a distance , that look like sparrows .
Its roots are on the surface of the ground , and its seed is like foam .
It is from the use of this plant that linen gets its shiny whiteness .
In summer it is pounded in a mortar for epilepsy , the dose being an acetabulum in white wine ; for it causes vomiting , and is very useful for the drug called diacodion and arteriace .
This preparation however is made by steeping one hundred and twenty heads of this or any other wild poppy in three sextarii of rain water for two days ; then they are thoroughly boiled in the same water , and after the whole has been dried it is again boiled down to one half with honey in a slow heat .
More recently there has been added six drachmae of saffron , hypocisthis , frankincense and gum arabic , with a sextarius of Cretan raisin-wine .
This however is just for show ; this simple and old-fashioned remedy depends for its virtues entirely on the poppy and honey .
SOL A third variety is tithymalon , called by some mecon , by others paralion , with a leaf like that of flax , a white flower , and a head of the size of a bean .
It is gathered when the grape is at its best and then dried in the shade .
Its seed , taken in half an acetabulum of honey wine , purges the bowels .
But the head of any poppy , whether fresh or dried , if applied to the eyes relieves fluxes .
Opium taken in nearly neat wine , if administered immediately , is an antidote for the stings of scorpions .
Some give this property only to the dark variety , if its heads or leaves be pounded up .
SOL There is also purslane , which is called peplis , being not much more beneficial than the cultivated variety , of which are recorded remarkable benefits : that the poison of arrows and of the serpents haemorrhoids and prester are counteracted if purslane be taken as food , and if it be applied to the wound , the poison is drawn out ; likewise the poison of henbane if purslane be taken in raisin wine , after extraction of the juice .
When the plant itself is not available , its seed has a similarly beneficial effect .
It also counteracts the impurities of water , and if pounded and applied in wine it cures headache and sores on the head ; other sores it heals if chewed and applied with honey .
So prepared it is applied also to the cranium of infants , and to an umbilical hernia ; for eye-fluxes in persons of all ages , with pearl bailey , to the forehead and temples , but to the eyes themselves in milk and honey ; also , if the eyes should fall forwards pounded leaves are applied with bean husks , to blisters with pearl barley , salt and vinegar .
Sores in the mouth and gumboils are relieved by chewing it raw ; toothache likewise and sore tonsils by the juice of the boiled plant , to which some have added a little myrrh .
But to chew it makes firm loose teeth , strengthens the voice and keeps away thirst .
Pains at the back of the neck are relieved by it with equal parts of gall nut , linseed and honey , complaints of the breasts with honey or Cimolian chalk , while asthma is alleviated by a draught of the seed with honey .
Taken in salad it strengthens the stomach .
It is applied with pearl barley to reduce high temperature , and besides this when chewed it also cools the intestines .
It arrests vomiting .
For dysentery and abscesses it is eaten in vinegar or taken in drink with cummin , and for tenesmus it is boiled .
Whether eaten or drunk it is good for epilepsy , for menstruation if one acetabulum be taken in concentrated must , for hot gout and crysipelas if applied with salt .
A draught of its juice helps the kidneys and the bladder , expelling also intestinal parasites .
For the pain of wounds it is applied in oil with pearl barley .
It softens indurations of the sinews .
Metrodorus , author of Compendium of Prescriptions from Roots , was of opinion that it should be given after delivery to aid the afterbirth .
It checks lust and amorous dreams .
A Spanish prince , father of a man of praetorian rank , because of unbearable disease of the uvula , to my knowledge carries except in the bath a root of purslane hung round his neck by a thread , being in this way relieved of all inconvenience .
Moreover , I have found in my authorities that the head rubbed with purslane ointment is free from catarrh the whole year .
It is supposed however to weaken the eyesight .
SOL Coriander is not found among wild plants .
The best , as is generally agreed , is the Egyptian .
It is an antidote for the poison of one kind of serpent , the amphisbaena , both taken in drink and applied .
It heals other wounds also , when pounded , besides night rashes and blisters ; in this form too , with honey or raisins , all tumours and gatherings , though to treat the anus the pounded plant must be applied in vinegar .
Some prescribe three grains of seed to be swallowed before the fit comes on by patients with tertian ague , or more than three to be applied in ointment to the forehead .
There are some who believe that it is beneficial to place coriander before sunrise under the pillows .
The fresh plant has great power to cool inflammations .
Spreading sores also are healed by coriander with honey or raisins , likewise diseased testes , burns , carbuncles and sore ears , fluxes of the eyes too if woman 's milk be added , while fluxes from belly or intestines are stayed by the seed taken in water .
It is also taken in drink with rue for cholera .
Intestinal parasites are expelled by coriander seed , taken with pomegranate juice and oil .
Xenocrates records a great wonder , if it be a fact : that if women take in drink one grain of the seed the menses are retarded for one day , for two days if she takes two grains , and so on , one day 's delay for each grain taken .
M. Varro thinks that by slightly pounded coriander and cummin , with vinegar , meat of any kind can be kept sweet in the heat of summer .
SOL Orache is also found wild , a vegetable accused by Pythagoras of causing dropsy , jaundice and pallor , and of being very hard indeed to digest ; he adds as another drawback that not even in gardens does anything grow near it without drooping .
Dionysius and Diocles have added that very many diseases arise from it , that it must never be boiled without changing the water often , that it is injurious to the stomach , and that it is the cause of freckles and pimples .
I am at a loss to understand why Solon of Smyrna has stated that orache is difficult to grow in Italy .
Hippocrates injects it with beet for complaints of the womb .
Lycus of Naples prescribed it to be taken in drink for stings of the Spanish fly , and considered that it might be applied , scesses , incipient boils , and all indurations ; with honey , vinegar and soda he used it in this way for erysipelas , and likewise gout .
It is said to bring away scabrous nails without producing a sore .
There are some who give its seed with honey for jaundice , add soda and rub the throat and tonsils , besides using it as a purge , boiled either by itself or with mallows or lentils .
They also give it as an emetic .
They use wild orache as a hair-dye as well as for the purposes mentioned above .
SOL On the other hand , both kinds of mallow , the cultivated and the wild , are highly praised .
The two lands of them are distinguished by the size of the leaf .
Among cultivated mallows the larger is called by the Greeks malope ; the other is called malache , the reason being , it is thought , because it relaxes the bowels .
But of the wild kinds , the one with a large leaf and white roots , called althaea , has received from some the name of phstolochia , from the excellence of its properties .
Mallows make richer every soil in which they are sown .
They are efficacious against every sort of stings , especially those of scorpions , wasps and similar creatures , and those of the shrewmouse .
Moreover , those who have been rubbed beforehand with oil and any one of the mallows pounded , or who carry it on their persons , are never stung .
A leaf placed on a scorpion paralyses it .
Mallows also counteract the poison of white lead .
Raw mallow applied with saltpetre extracts splinters and thorns ; taken moreover boiled with its root it counteracts the poison of the sea-hare , some adding that it must be brought back by vomiting .
Other marvels are reported of the mallows , the most wonderful being that whoever swallows daily half a cyathus of the juice of any one of them will be immune to all diseases .
Running sores on the head are cured by mallows that have rotted in urine , lichen and sores in the mouth by them and honey , dandruff and loose teeth by a decoction of the root .
With the root of the single-stem plant they stab around an aching tooth until the pain ceases ; the same plant a clears scrofula and parotid abscesses , and with the addition of human saliva superficial abscess also , and that without leaving a wound .
The seed taken in dark wine clears away phlegm and nausea .
The root attached as an amulet in dark wool stays troubles of the breasts ; boiled in milk and taken like broth .
it relieves a cough in five days .
Sextius Niger says that mallows are injurious to the stomach ; the Theban lady Olympias that with goose-grease they cause abortion , and others that a handful of their leaves taken in oil and wine assist the menstruation of women .
It is agreed at any rate that women in labour are more quickly delivered if mallow leaves are spread under them , but they must be withdrawn immediately after delivery for fear of prolapsus of the womb .
They give the juice to be drunk by women in labour ; they must be fasting , and the dose is a hemina boiled down in wine .
Moreover , they attach the seed to the arm of sufferers from spermatorrhoea , and mallows are so aphrodisiac that Xenocrates maintains that the seeds of the single-stem mallow , sprinkled for the treatment of women , stimulate their sexual desire to an infinite degree , and that three roots attached near to the part have a like effect .
He says too that injections of mallow are very good for tenesmus and dysentery , and also for rectal troubles , or fomentations may be used .
The juice is also given warm in doses of three cyathi to sufferers from melancholia , and in doses of four to those who are raving ; for epilepsy the dose is a hemina of the decoded juice .
This juice is also applied warm to patients with stone , and to sufferers from flatulence , griping and opisthotonia .
For both erysipelas and burns the leaves are applied boiled down to an oily paste , and they are applied raw with bread for painful wounds .
The juice of a decoction is good for sinews , bladder and gnawings of the intestines .
The paste soothes the womb whether taken by the mouth or injected ; the decoction makes the passage pleasant .
For all purposes mentioned above the root of althaea is more efficacious , especially for spasms and ruptures .
Boiled in water it checks looseness of the bowels ; taken in white wine it is good for scrofula , parotid abscesses and inflammation of the breasts , and an application of the leaves , boiled down in wine , removes superficial abscess .
The same leaves dried and boiled down in milk cure very quickly the most racking cough .
Hippocrates gave the juice of the boiled-down root to be drunk by wounded men who were thirsty through loss of blood , and applied the plant itself with honey and resin to wounds ; likewise to bruises , sprains , and swellings ; as above also to muscles , sinews and joints .
He gave it to be taken in wine by patients suffering from cramp or dysentery .
It is remarkable that water to which this root has been added thickens in the open air and congeals .
The fresher it is also , the better .
SOL Sorrel ( lapathum ) has similar properties .
There is also a wild kind called by some oxalis , by our people rumex and by others gelding sorrel .
It has a taste very like that of the cultivated kind , pointed leaves , the colour of white beet and a very small root , being when mixed with axle-grease very efficacious for scrofula .
There is also another kind , generally called pointed sorrel , even more like the cultivated kind , but with a leaf more pointed and redder , growing only in marshy localities .
There are some who speak of a water sorrel , growing in water , and yet another , horse sorrel , larger , paler and more compact than the cultivated kind .
The wild sorrels heal the stings of scorpions and protect from stings those who carry them on their persons .
The root , boiled down in vinegar , is good for the teeth , if the juice be used as a mouth wash , while to drink the same is good for jaundice .
The seed cures inveterate stomach troubles .
The root of horse sorrel , in particular , brings away scabrous nails ; its seed taken in wine in doses of two drachmae cures dysentery .
The seed of pointed sorret washed in rainwater , with the addition of a piece of gum arabic , of the size of a lentil , is good for spitting of blood .
Most excellent lozenges are made from the leaves and root , with the addition of soda and a little frankincense .
When wanted for use they are steeped in vinegar .
SOL But the cultivated kind is applied to the forehead for fluxes from the eyes .
With the root they treat lichen and leprous sores ; it is boiled down in wine however for scrofula and parotid abscesses , taken in wine for stone , and applied as liniment for complaints of the spleen , being equally good for coelac troubles , dysentery and tenesmus .
For all the same purposes the juice of sorrel is more efficacious ; it causes belching , is diuretic , and dispels dimness of the eyes ; put in the bottom of the bath , or rubbed on the body without oil before taking a bath , it also removes itching of the body .
The root also chewed strengthens loose teeth .
A decoction of it with wine checks looseness of the bowels ; the leaves relax them .
Solon has added ( not to omit anything ) another variety , ox sorrel , differing from the others only in the depth of the root , and by the efficacy of this root , when taken in wine , to cure dysentery .
SOL Mustard , of which we have three kinds among the cultivated plants , Pythagoras judged to be chief of those whose pungent properties reach a high level , since no other penetrates further into the nostrils and brain .
Pounded it is applied with vinegar to the bites of serpents and scorpion stings .
It counteracts the poisons of fungi .
For phlegm it is kept in the mouth until it melts , or is used as a gargle with hydromel .
For toothache it is chewed , for the uvula it is used as a gargle with vinegar and honey .
It is very beneficial for all stomach troubles .
Taken with food it eases expectoration from the lungs , and is given to asthmatics , as well as for epileptic exhaustion a with the addition of juice of cucumber .
lit clears the senses , and , by the sneezing caused by it , the head ; it relaxes the bowels ; it promotes menstruation and urine .
Pounded with figs and cummin , each being one third of the whole , it is applied externally for dropsy .
By its powerful smell when mixed with vinegar mustard revives those in epileptic swoons and women fainting with prolapsus , as well as those afflicted with lethargus .
Tordylon — that is , the seed of hartwort — is added , and if the lethargy be unusually deep , it is applied with fig in vinegar to the legs or even to the head .
Long-standing pains of the chest , loins , hips , shoulders , and whatever deep-seated troubles in any part of the body have to be removed , are relieved by the caustic property of an external application , causing blisters ; but when there is great hardness the application is made without the fig , or if too severe burning be feared , between a doubled cloth .
They use it with red earth for mange , itch , leprous sores , phthiriasis , tetanus and opisthotonus .
With honey they also use it as ointment for scabrous cheeks or dimness of vision , and the juice is extracted in three ways in an earthen pot , in which it is slightly warmed by the sun .
There also exudes from the slender stem of the mustard plant a milky juice , which , when it has thus hardened , cures toothache .
Seed and root , steeped in must , are pounded together , and a handful is swallowed to strengthen the throat , stomach , eyes , head and all the senses , as well as the lassitude of women , being a very wholesome medicine indeed .
Taken in vinegar it also disperses stone .
To livid places and bruises it is applied with honey and goose-grease , or else with Cyprian wax .
From mustard-seed , steeped in olive oil and then compressed , there is extracted an oil , which is used for stiffness of the sinews , loins and hips , and for violent chills .
SOL The same nature and properties as those of mustard are said to belong to adarca , mentioned in my account of wild plants , which grows on the bark of reeds right under the tuft .
SOL Most authorities have placed among the especially valuable plants horehound , called by some Greeks prasion , by others linostrophon , by a few philopais or philochares , a plant too well known to need description .
Its leaves and seed pounded together are good for the bites of serpents , pains in the chest and side , and chronic cough ; and those who have been troubled with spitting of blood derive extraordinary benefit from its stalks , boiled in water with Italian millet to mellow the harshness of the juice .
It is applied externally with grease for scrofula .
There are some who prescribe for a cough a two-finger pinch of the fresh seed , boiled down with a handful of emmer to which a little oil and salt has been added , to be swallowed by the patients when fasting .
Others consider incomparable for the same purpose an extract of horehound and fennel ; three sextarii are extracted and boiled down to two ; a sextarius of honey is added and the whole is again boiled down to two .
The dose should be a spoonful a day swallowed in a cyathus of water .
Pounded horehound with honey is remarkably good for maladies of the male genitals .
It clears up lichen if applied in vinegar , and is healing for ruptures , spasms , cramp and the sinews .
Taken with salt and vinegar it relaxes the bowels , also helping menstruation and the afterbirth .
Dried and powdered it is very efficacious with honey for a dry cough , likewise for gangrene and hangnails .
The juice moreover with honey is good for the ear-laps , nostrils , jaundice , and for lessening the secretion of bile ; as an antidote for poisons it is among the few most effective .
The plant itself with iris and honey purges the stomach , clears the lungs of phlegm , promotes urine , but should be avoided when there is an ulcerated bladder or the kidneys are affected .
The juice is also said to improve the eyesight .
Castor records two kinds of horehound , the dark and the white , the latter being preferred by him .
He puts horehound juice into an empty eggshell , and then pours in the egg itself and honey in equal proportions ; this mixture warmed he assures us brings abscesses to a head , cleanses them and heals them .
Pounded also he applied horehound with old axle-grease to dog bites .
SOL Wild thyme is thought to be so named from its being a creeping plant ; this characteristic is to be found only in the wild kind , mostly in rocky districts ; the cultivated does not creep , but grows up to be a palm in height .
That growing spontaneously is a more luxuriant plant , with paler leaves and stalks , an efficacious antidote for serpent bites , particularly those of cenchris scolopendras , land or sea , and scorpions , the stalks and leaves being boiled in wine .
When burnt it keeps away all such creatures by its smell , and is an especially potent antidote for the poison of marine creatures .
For headache a decoction in vinegar is applied to the temples and forehead , rose oil being added ; so also for phrenitis and lethargus .
For griping and strangury , for quinsy and vomiting , four drachmae are taken in water .
For liver complaints four oboli of the leaves are given , and the same in vinegar for splenic troubles .
For spitting of blood it is pounded in two cyathi of oxymel .
SOL Wild sisymbrium , called by some thymbraion , grows no higher than a foot .
The sisymbrium growing in watery districts resembles cress , and both are efficacious for the stings of such creatures as hornets ; the kind growing on dry soil has a pleasant scent and is used for wreaths .
The leaf is narrower .
They both relieve headache as well as fluxes from the eyes , according to the testimony of Philinus .
Some add bread , but others boil it in wine by itself .
It heals night rashes and spots on women 's faces within four days if applied at night and taken away during the day .
Vomiting , hiccough , griping and fluxes of the stomach it checks whether taken in food or drunk as juice .
It should not be eaten by pregnant women unless the foetus be dead , since even an application of it produces abortion .
Taken with wine it is diuretic , the wild kind moreover even expels stone .
Those who must remain awake are kept roused by an infusion in vinegar poured on the head .
SOL Linseed is not only used in combination with other ingredients , but also by itself removes spots on women 's faces , and its juice benefits the eyesight .
With frankincense and water or with myrrh and wine it relieves fluxes from the eyes , parotid abscesses with honey or grease or wax , fluxes from the stomach when sprinkled in water like pearl barley , and quinsies when boiled in water and oil and applied externally with anise .
It is roasted to check looseness of the bowels .
For coeliac trouble and dysentery it is applied in vinegar .
For pains of the liver it is eaten with raisins ; for consumption electuaries are made from the seed with very useful results .
Linseed meal , with soda or salt or ash added , softens indurations of the muscles , sinews , joints and nape of the neck , as well as the membranes of the brain .
With a fig it also opens and brings to a head a parotid abscess ; with the root moreover of wild cucumber it extracts bodies sticking into the flesh , including pieces of broken bone .
Boiled in wine it prevents a sore from spreading , and with honey checks eruptions of phlegm .
With an equal part of cress it cures scabrous nails , with resin and myrrh complaints of the testes and hernia , and in water gangrene .
Stomach ache is cured by a decoction of one sextarius of linseed with an equal quantity of fenugreek in hydromel , and dangerous maladies of the intestines and lower trunk by an enema of linseed in oil or honey .
SOL Blite seems to be an inactive plant , without flavour or any sharp quality , for which reason in Menander husbands use the name as a term of abuse for their wives .
It is injurious to the stomach .
It so disturbs the bowels as to cause in some persons .
It is said however to be good for scorpion stings when drunk in wine , for corns on the feet when applied in a liniment , and also , with oil , for diseases of the spleen and for pain in the temples .
Used as a food it is thought by Hippocrates to check menstruation .
SOL Spignel is not grown in Italy except by medical men , and by very few of these .
There are two kinds of it .
The more famous is called Athamanticum or Athamanicum , because , as some think , it was discovered by Athamas , or according to others because the most esteemed variety is found in Athamania .
Its leaves are like those of anise , the stem being sometimes two feet high ; it has many roots , slanting , dark , and occasionally deep , the plant being less red than the other kind .
The root , pounded or boiled and taken in water , is diuretic , and wonderfully good for dispersing flatulence of the stomach , and also for griping and troubles of the bladder and of the womb .
With honey it is applied to the joints , and an application with celery to the lower abdomen is diuretic for babies .
SOL Fennel has been made famous , as we have said , by serpents , which taste it to east off their old skin and with its juice improve their eyesight .
Consequently it has been inferred that by fennel juice especially can dimness of human vision also be removed .
This juice is collected when the stem is swelling to bud , dried in the sun and applied in honey as an ointment .
The most esteemed is gathered in Spain from the teardrops of the plant .
It is also made from fresh seed and from incisions in the root when germination has first begun .
SOL There is in this class of plant a wild variety called hippomarathum , by some myrsineum , with larger leaves and a sharper taste , taller , as thick as a walking-stick , and with a white root .
It grows in warm and rocky soils .
Diocles has spoken of yet another kind of hippomarathum , with a long , narrow leaf , and a seed like that of coriander .
The cultivated kind is used in medicine for the wounds of scorpions and serpents , the seed being taken in wine .
The juice is also dropped into the ears , where it kills the worms infesting them .
The plant itself is an ingredient of nearly all condiments , being especially suited for digestives .
Moreover , it is placed under the crusts of loaves .
The seed braces a relaxed stomach , even if taken in fevers , relieves nausea if pounded and taken in water , and is a highly praised remedy for complaints of the lungs and liver .
It stays looseness of the bowels , if a moderate amount be taken ; when taken for griping it is diuretic , and a decoction drunk when milk fails fills the breasts again .
The root cleanses the kidneys when taken with barley water , or if the juice of the boiled-down root be drunk with wine .
Taken in wine the root is also good for dropsy , likewise for spasms .
The leaves are applied in vinegar to inflamed tumours , and they expel stones in the bladder .
In whatever way it is taken it creates an abundance of seed , being very soothing to the privates , whether the root be boiled down with wine for a fomentation , or the plant be pounded up and applied in oil .
Many also apply it with wax to bruises , and use the root in the juice or with honey for dog bites , and in wine for the sting of the multipede .
Hippomarathum is for all purposes more drastic , expelling stone particularly well , and with a soft wine doing good to the bladder and to retarded menstruation .
In this the seed is more efficacious than the root .
The dose of either is a two-finger pinch , ground and added to drink .
Petrichus who wrote Serpent-lore and Miecion , author of Prescriptions from Roots , thought nothing more efficacious than hippomarathum for serpent bites .
Nicander indeed also has placed it far from last in his list of antidotes .
SOL Hemp at first grew in woods , with a darker and rougher leaf .
Its seed is said to make the genitals impotent .
The juice from it drives out of the ears the worms and any other creature that has entered them , but at the cost of a headache ; so potent is its nature that when poured into water it is said to make it coagulate .
And so , drunk in their water , it regulates the bowels of beasts of burden .
The root boiled in water eases cramped joints , gout too and similar violent pains .
It is applied raw to burns , but is often changed before it gets dry .
SOL Fennel-giant has a seed similar to that of dill .
The kind with one stem divided at the top is supposed to be female .
The stems are eaten boiled , and are made tasty with brine and honey , being good for the stomach .
If however too many are eaten they cause headache .
One denarius of the root in two cyathi of wine is taken for serpent bites , and the root itself is applied to them .
So administered it also cures griping , and in oil and vinegar it checks profuse perspirations , even in fevers .
To swallow the juice of fennel-giant , of the size of a bean in quantity , loosens the bowels .
The pith from the fresh plant is good for the womb , and for all the complaints I have mentioned .
To stop bleeding ten seeds are ground and taken in wine or with some pith .
There are some who think that the seed should be given for epilepsy from the fourth day of the moon to the seventh , in doses of one spoonful .
The nature of fennel-giant is very poisonous to the murena , a mere touch causing death .
Castor thought that the juice of the root was also very beneficial to the eyesight .
SOL We have also spoken in our description of garden plants of the cultivation of thistles , and so we should not put off a discussion of their medical value .
Of wild thistles there are two kinds : one being more bushy as soon as it leaves the earth , the other is thicker , but has only one stem .
Both kinds have only a few leaves , prickly and with pointed heads , but the latter puts forth in the middle of its points a purple flower , that quickly turns white and is gone with the wind ; the Greeks call it σκόλυμος .
If this kind be pounded and compressed before it flowers , an application of the juice restores skin and hair lost by mange .
The root of any kind boiled in water is said to create thirst in those who are drunkards .
It strengthens the stomach , and , if we may believe the report , it also affects the womb in such a way that male children are engendered .
Glaucias , at any rate , who seems to have been a most careful student of thistles , put this statement on record .
A gum-like mastich coming from thistles makes the breath sweet .
SOL And now that I am about to leave garden plants , I have appended a very famous preparation from them which is used to counteract the poison of venomous animals .
It is carved in verse upon a stone in the temple of Aesculapius in Cos .
Take two denarii of wild thyme , and the same of opopanax and of spignel respectively , one denarius of trefoil seed , of aniseed , fennel-seed , ami and parsley , six denarii respectively , and twelve denarii of vetch meal .
These are ground and passed through a sieve , and then kneaded with the best wine obtainable into lozenges , each of one victoriatus .
One of these is given at a time mixed with three cyathi of wine .
King Antiochus the Great is said to have used this preparation as an antidote for the poison of all venomous creatures except the asp .
SOL
