Thus far have I treated of the position and the wonders of the earth , of the waters , the stars , and the proportion of the universe and its dimensions .
I shall now proceed to describe its individual parts ; although indeed we may with reason look upon the task as of an infinite nature , and one not to be rashly commenced upon without incurring censure .
And yet , on the other hand , there is nothing which ought less to require an apology , if it is only considered how far from surprising it is that a mere mortal cannot be acquainted with everything .
I shall therefore not follow any single author , but shall employ , in relation to each subject , such writers as I shall look upon as most worthy of credit .
For , indeed , it is the characteristic of nearly all of them , that they display the greatest care and accuracy in the description of the countries in which they respectively flourished ; so that by doing this , I shall neither have to blame nor contradict any one .
SOL The names of the different places will here be simply given , and as briefly as possible ; the account of their celebrity , and the events which have given rise thereto , being deferred to a more appropriate occasion ; for it must be remembered that I am here speaking of the earth as a whole , and I wish to be understood as using the names without any reference whatever to their celebrity , and as though the places themselves were in their infancy , and had not as yet acquired any fame through great events .
The name is mentioned , it is true , but only as forming a part of the world and the system of the universe .
SOL The whole globe is divided into three parts , Europe , Asia , and Africa .
Our description commences where the sun sets and at the Straits of Gades , where the Atlantic ocean , bursting in , is poured forth into the inland seas .
As it makes its entrance from that side , Africa is on the right hand and Europe on the left ; Asia lies between them ; the boundaries being the rivers Tanais and Nile .
The Straits of the ocean , of which I have just spoken , extend fifteen miles in length and five in breadth , measured from the village of Mellaria in Spain to the Album Promontorium or White Promontory in Africa , as we learn from Turranius Gracilis , who was born in that vicinity .
Titus Livius and Cornelius Nepos however have stated the breadth , where it is least , to be seven miles , and where greatest , ten ; from so small a mouth as this does so immense an expanse of water open upon us !
Nor is our astonishment diminished by the fact of its being of great depth ; for , instead of that , there are numerous breakers and shoals , white with foam , to strike the mariner with alarm .
From this circumstance it is , that many have called this spot the threshold of The Inland Sea .
SOL At the narrowest part of the Straits , there are mountains placed to form barriers to the entrance on either side , Abyla in Africa , and Calpe in Europe , the boundaries formerly of the labours of Hercules .
Hence it is that the inhabitants have called them the Columns of that god ; they also believe that they were dug through by him ; upon which the sea , which was before excluded , gained admission , and so changed the face of nature .
SOL THE BOUNDARIES AND GULFS OF EUROPE FIRST SET FORTH IN A GENERAL WAY .
I shall first then speak of Europe , the foster-mother of that people which has conquered all other nations , and itself by far the most beauteous portion of the earth .
Indeed , many persons have , not without reason , considered it , not as a third part only of the earth , but as equal to all the rest , looking upon the whole of our globe as divided into two parts only , by a line drawn from the river Tanais to the Straits of Gades .
The ocean , after pouring the waters of the Atlantic through the inlet which I have here described , and , in its eager progress , overwhelming all the lands which have had to dread its approach , skirts with its winding course the shores of those parts which offer a more effectual resistance , hollowing out the coast of Europe especially into numerous bays , among which there are four Gulfs that are more particularly remarkable .
The first of these begins at Calpe , which I have previously mentioned , the most distant mountain of Spain ; and bends , describing an immense curve , as far as Locri and the Promontory of Bruttium .
SOL OF SPAIN GENERALLY .
The first land situate upon this Gulf is that which is called the Farther Spain or Baetica ; next to which , beginning at the frontier town of Urgi , is the Nearer , or Tarraconensian Spain , extending as far as the chain of the Pyrenees .
The Farther Spain is divided lengthwise into two provinces , Lusitania and Baetica , the former stretching along the northern side of the latter , and being divided from it by the river Ana .
The source of this river is in the district of Laminium , in the Nearer Spain .
It first spreads out into a number of small lakes , and then again contracts itself into a narrow channel , or entirely disappears under ground , and after frequently disappearing and again coming to light , finally discharges itself into the Atlantic Ocean .
Tarraconensian Spain lies on one side , contiguous to the Pyrenees , running downwards along the sides of that chain , and , stretching across from the Iberian Sea to the Gallic ocean , is separated from Baetica and Lusitania by Mount Solorius , the chains of the Oretani and the Carpetani , and that of the Astures .
SOL OF BAETICA .
Baetica , so called from the river which divides it in the middle , excels all the other provinces in the richness of its cultivation and the peculiar fertility and beauty of its vegetation .
SOL It consists of four jurisdictions , those of Gades , of Corduba , of Astigi , and of Hispalis .
The total number of its towns is 175 ; of these nine are colonies , and eight municipal towns ; twenty-nine have been long since presented with the old Latin rights ; six are free towns , three federate , and 120 tributary .
SOL In this district , the things that more especially deserve notice , or are more easily explained in the Latin tongue , are the following , beginning at the river Ana , along the line of the seashore ; the town of Onoba , surnamed Aestuaria ; the rivers Luxia and Urium , flowing through this territory between the Ana and the Baetis ; the Marian [ Hareni ] Mountains ; the river Baetis ; the coast of Corum , with its winding bay ; opposite to which is Gades , of which we shall have occasion to speak among the islands .
Next comes the Promontory of Juno , and the port of Baesippo ; the towns of Baelo and Mellaria , at which latter begin the Straits of the Atlantic ; Carteia , called by the Greeks Tartessos ; and the mountain of Calpe .
SOL Along the coast of the inland sea is the town of Barbesula with its river ; also Salduba ; the town of Suel ; and then Malaca , with its river , one of the federate towns .
Next to this comes Maenoba , with its river ; then Sexifirmum , surnamed Julium ; Selambina ; Abdera ; and Murgi , which is at the boundary of Baetica .
M. Agrippa supposed that all this coast was peopled by colonists of Punic origin .
Beyond the Anas , and facing the Atlantic , is the country of the Bastuli and the Turditani .
M. Varro informs us , that the Iberians , the Persians , the Phoenicians , the Celts , and the Carthaginians spread themselves over the whole of Spain ; that the name " Lusitania " is derived from the games ( lusus ) of Father Bacchus , or the fury ( lyssa ) of his frantic attendants , and that Pan was the governor of the whole of it .
But the traditions respecting Hercules and Pyrene , as well as Saturn , I conceive to be fabulous in the highest degree .
SOL The Baetis does not rise , as some writers have asserted , near the town of Mentesa , in the province of Tarraco , but in the Tugiensian Forest ; and near it rises the river Tader , which waters the territory of Carthage .
At Ilorcum it turns away from the Funeral Pile of Scipio ; then taking a sweep to the left , it falls into the Atlantic Ocean , giving its name to this province : at its source it is but small , though during its course it receives many other streams , which it deprives as well of their waters as their renown .
It first enters Baetica in Ossigitania , and glides gently , with a smooth current , past many towns situate on either side of its banks .
SOL Between this river and the sea-shore the most celebrated places inland are Segida , also surnamed Augurina ; Ulia , called Fidentia ; Urgao or Alba , Ebora or Cerealis , Iliberri or Florentini , Ilipula or Laus , Artigi or Julienses , Vesci or Faventia , Singili , Ategua , Arialdunum , Agla Minor , Baebro , Castra Vinaria , Cisimbrium , Hippo Nova , Ilurco , Osca , Oscua , Sucaelo , Unditanum , Old Tucci ; all which towns are in that part of Bastetania which extends towards the sea , but in the jurisdiction of Corduba .
In the neighbourhood of the river itself is Ossigi , also surnamed Latonium , Iliturgi or Forum Julium , Ipra , Isturgi or Triumphales , Ucia , and , fourteen miles inland , Obulco , which is also called Pontificense .
SOL Next to these comes Ripa , Epora , of the federate towns , Sacili Martialium , and Onoba .
On the right bank is Corduba , a Roman colony surnamed Patricia ; here the Baetis first becomes navigable .
There are also the towns of Carbula and Detumo , and the river Singilis , which falls into the Baetis on the same side .
SOL The towns in the jurisdiction of Hispalis are the following : Celti , Axati , Arua , Canama , Naeva , Ilipa , surnamed Ilpa , and Italica .
On the left of the river is the colony of Hispalis named Romuliensis , and , on the opposite side , the town of Osset , surnamed Julia Constantia , Lucurgentum , or Juli Genius , Orippo Caura , Siarum , and the river Maenuba , which enters the Baetis on its right bank .
Between the aestuaries of the Baetis lie the towns of Nebrissa , surnamed Veneria , and of Colobana .
The colonies are , Hasta , which is also called Regia , and , more inland , that of Asido , surnamed Caesarina .
SOL The river Singilis , discharging itself into the Baetis at the place already mentioned , washes the colony of Astigi , surnamed Augusta Firma , at which place it becomes navigable .
The other colonies in this jurisdiction which are exempt from tribute are Tucci , surnamed Augusta Gemella , Itucci called Virtus Julia , Ucubi or Claritas Julia , Urso or Genetiva Urbanorum ; and among them in former times Munda , which was taken with the son of Pompey .
The free towns are Old Astigi and Ostippo ; the tributary towns are Callet , Callicula , Castra Gemina , the Lesser Ilipula , Marruca , Sacrana , Obulcula , Oningi , Sabora , Ventippo .
As you move away from the sea-coast , near where the river Maenoba is navigable , you find , at no great distance , the Olontigi , Laelia , Lastigi .
SOL The country which extends from the Baetis to the river Anas , beyond the districts already described , is called Baeturia , and is divided into two parts and the same number of nations ; the Celtici , who border upon Lusitania , in the jurisdiction of Hispalis , and the Turduli , who dwell on the verge of Lusitania and Tarraconensis , and are under the protection of the laws of Corduba .
It is evident that the Celtici have sprung from the Celtiberi , and have come from Lusitania , from their religious rites , their language , and the names of their towns , which in Baetica are distinguished by the following epithets , which have been given to them .
Seria has received the surname of Fama Julia , Nertobriga that of Concordia Julia , Segida that of Restituta Julia , and Ugultunia Contributa Julia , which Curiga also has now .
Constantia Julia was Lacimurga , the present Fortunales were the Stereses , and the Aeneanici were the Callenses .
Besides these , there are in Celtica the towns of Acinippo , Arunda , Arunci , Turobriga , Lastigi , Salpesa , Saepone , and Serippo .
SOL The other Baeturia , which we have mentioned , is inhabited by the Turduli , and , in the jurisdiction of Corduba , has some towns which are by no means inconsiderable ; Arsa , Mellaria , Mirobriga , and Sisapo , in the district of Osintias .
SOL To the jurisdiction of Gades belongs Regina , with Roman citizens ; and Laepia , Ulia , Carisa surnamed Aurelia , Urgia or Castrum Julium , likewise called Caesaris Salutariensis , all of which enjoy Latin rights .
The tributary towns are Besaro , Belippo , Barbesula , Lacippo , Baesippo , Callet , Cappa with Oleastro , Iptuci , Brana , Lacibi , Saguntia , Saudo , Usaepo .
SOL M. Agrippa has also stated the whole length of this province to be 475 miles , and its breadth 257 ; but this was at a time when its boundaries extended to Carthage , a circumstance which has often caused great errors in calculations ; which are generally the result either of changes effected in the limits of provinces , or of the fact that in the reckoning of distances the length of the miles has been arbitrarily increased or diminished .
In some parts too the sea has been long making encroachments upon the land , and in others again the shores have advanced ; while the course of rivers in this place has become more serpentine , in that more direct .
And then , besides , some writers begin their measurements at one place , and some at another , and so proceed in different directions ; and hence the result is , that no two accounts agree .
SOL ( 2 .
) At the present day the length of Baetica , from the town of Castulo , on its frontier , to Gades is 250 miles , and from Murgi , which lies on the sea-coast , twenty-five miles more .
The breadth , measured from the coast of Carteia , is 234 miles .
Who is there that can entertain the belief that Agrippa , a man of such extraordinary diligence , and one who bestowed so much care on his subject , when he proposed to place before the eyes of the world a survey of that world , could be guilty of such a mistake as this , and that too when seconded by the late emperor the divine Augustus ?
For it was that emperor who completed the [ Vipsania ] Portico which had been begun by his sister , and in which the survey was to be kept , in conformity with the plan and descriptions of M .
Agrippa .
SOL OF NEARER SPAIN : The ancient form of the Nearer Spain , like that of many other provinces , is somewhat changed , since the time when Pompey the Great , upon the trophies he erected in the Pyrenees , testified that 877 towns , from the Alps to the borders of the Farther Spain , had been reduced to subjection by him .
The whole province is now divided into seven jurisdictions , those of Carthage , of Tarraco , of Caesar Augusta , of Clunia , of Asturica , of Lucus , and of the Bracari .
To these are to be added the islands , which will be described on another occasion , as also 293 states which are dependent on others ; besides which the province contains 179 towns .
Of these , twelve are colonies , thirteen , towns with the rights of Roman citizens , eighteen with the old Latian rights , one confederate , and 135 tributary .
SOL The first people that we come to on the coast are the Bastuli ; after whom , proceeding according to the order which I shall follow , as we go inland , there are the Mentesani , the Oretani , and the Carpetani on the Tagus , and next to them the Vaccaei , the Vectones , and the Celtiberian Arevaci .
The towns nearest to the coast are Urci , and Barea included in Baetica , the district of Mavitania , next to it Deitania , and then Contestania , and the colony of New Carthage ; from the Promontory of which , known as the Promontorium Saturni , to the city of Caesarea in Mauritania , the passage is a distance of 187 miles .
The remaining objects worthy of mention on the coast are the river Tader , and the free colony of Ilici , whence the Ilicitanian Gulf derives its name ; to this colony the Icositani are subordinate .
SOL We next have Lucentum , holding Latin rights ; Dianium , a tributary town ; the river Sucro , and in former times a town of the same name , forming the frontier of Contestania .
Next is the district of Edetania , with the delightful expanse of a lake before it , and extending backward to Celtiberia .
Valentia , a colony , is situate three miles from the sea , after which comes the river Turium , and Saguntum at the same distance , a town of Roman citizens famous for its fidelity , the river Uduba , and the district of the Ilergaones .
The Iberus , a river enriched by its commerce , takes its rise in the country of the Cantabri , not far from the town of Juliobriga , and flows a distance of 450 miles ; 260 of which , from the town of Varia namely , it is available for the purposes of navigation .
From this river the name of Iberia has been given by the Greeks to the whole of Spain .
SOL Next comes the district of Cossetania , the river Subi , and the colony of Tarraco , which was built by the Scipios as Carthage was by the Carthaginians .
Then the district of the Ilergetes , the town of Subur , and the river Rubricatum , beyond which begin the Laletani and the Indigetes .
Behind these , in the order in which they will be mentioned , going back from the foot of the Pyrenees , are the Ausetani , the Lacetani , and along the Pyrenees , the Cerretani , next to whom are the Vascones .
On the coast is the colony of Barcino , surnamed Faventia ; Baetulo and Iluro , towns with Roman citizens ; the river Larnum , Blandae , the river Alba ; Emporiae , a city consisting of two parts , one peopled by the original inhabitants , the other by the Greek descendants of the Phocaeans ; and the river Ticher .
From this to the Venus Pyrenaea , on the other side of the Promontory , is a distance of forty miles .
SOL I shall now proceed to give an account of the more remarkable things in these several jurisdictions , in addition to those which have been already mentioned .
Forty-three different peoples are subject to the jurisdiction of the courts of Tarraco : of these the most famous are — holding the rights of Roman citizens , the Dertusani and the Bisgargitani ; enjoying Latin rights , the Ausetani , and the Cerretani , both Julian and Augustan , the Edetani , the Gerundenses , the Gessorienses , and the Teari , also called Julienses .
Among the tributaries are the Aquicaldenses , the Onenses , and the Baeculonenses .
SOL Caesar Augusta , a free colony , watered by the river Iberus , on the site of the town formerly called Salduba , is situate in the district of Edetania , and is the resort of fifty-five nations .
Of these there are , with the rights of Roman citizens , the Bellitani , the Celsenses , a former colony , the Calagurritani , surnamed the Nassici , the Ilerdenses , of the nation of the Surdaones , near whom is the river Sicoris , the Oscenses in the district of Vescitania , and the Turiasonenses .
Of those enjoying the rights of the ancient Latins , there are the Cascantenses the Ergavicenses , the Graccuritani , the Leonicenses , and the Osicerdenses ; of federate states , there are the Tarragenses ; and of tributaries , the Arcobrigenses , the Andologenses , the Aracelitani , the Bursaonenses , the Calagurritani , who are also surnamed the Fibularenses , the Complutenses , the Carenses , the Cincenses , the Cortonenses , the Damanitani , the Larnenses , the Lursenses , the Lumberitani , the Lacetani , the Lubienses , the Pompelonenses , and the Segienses .
SOL Sixty-five different nations resort to Carthage , besides the inhabitants of the islands .
Of the Accitana colony , there are the Gemellenses , and the town of Libisosona , surnamed Foroaugustana , to both of which have been granted Italian rights .
Of the colony of Salaria , there are the people of the following towns , enjoying the rights of ancient Latium : the Castulonenses , also called the Caesari Venales , the Saetabitani or Augustani , and the Valerienses .
The best known among the tributaries are the Alabanenses , the Bastitani , the Consaburrenses , the Dianenses , the Egelestani , the Ilorcitani , the Laminitani , the Mentesani , both those called Oritani and those called Bastuli , and the Oretani who are surnamed Germani , the people of Segobriga the capital of Celtiberia , those of Toletum the capital of Carpetania , situate on the river Tagus , and after them the Viatienses and the Virgilienses .
SOL To the jurisdiction of Clunia the Varduli contribute fourteen nations , of whom we need only particularize the Albanenses , the Turmodigi , consisting of four tribes , among which are the Segisamonenses and the Segisamaiulienses .
To the same jurisdiction belong the Carietes and the Vennenses with five states , among which are the Velienses .
Thither too resort the Pelendones of the Celtiberians , in four different nations , among whom the Numantini were especially famous .
Also , among the eighteen states of the Vaccaei , there are the Intercatienses , the Pallantini , the Lacobrigenses , and the Caucenses .
But among the seven peoples belonging to the Cantabri , Juliobriga is the only place worthy of mention ; and of the ten states of the Autrigones , Tritium and Virovesca .
The river Areva gives its name to the Arevaci ; of whom there are six towns , Segontia and Uxama , names which are frequently given to other places , as also Segovia and Nova Augusta , Termes , and Clunia itself , the frontier of Celtiberia .
The remaining portion turns off towards the ocean , being occupied by the Varduli , already mentioned , and the Cantabri .
SOL Next upon these touch the twenty-two nations of the Astures , who are divided into the Augustani and the Transmontani , with the magnificent city of Asturica .
Among these we have the Cigurri , the Paesici , the Lancienses , and the Zoelae .
The total number of the free population amounts to 240,000 persons .
SOL The jurisdiction of Lucus embraces , besides the Celtici and the Lebuni , sixteen different nations , but little known and with barbarous names .
The number however of the free population amounts to nearly 166,000 .
SOL In a similar manner the twenty-four states of the jurisdiction of the Bracari contain a population of 175,000 , among whom , besides the Bracari themselves , we may mention , without wearying the reader , the Bibali , the Coelerni , the Gallaeci , the Hequaesi , the Limici , and the Querquerni .
SOL The length of the Nearer Spain , from the Pyrenees to the frontier of Castulo , is 607 miles , and a little more if we follow the line of the coast ; while its breadth , from Tarraco to the shore of Olarson , is 307 miles .
From the foot of the Pyrenees , where it is wedged in by the near approach of the two seas , it gradually expands until it touches the Farther Spain , and thereby acquires a width more than double .
SOL Nearly the whole of Spain abounds in mines of lead , iron , copper , silver , and gold ; in the Nearer Spain there is also found lapis specularis ; in Baetica there is cinnabar .
There are also quarries of marble .
The Emperor Vespasianus Augustus , while still harassed by the storms that agitated the Roman state , conferred the Latin rights on the whole of Spain .
The Pyrenean mountains divide Spain from Gaul , their extremities projecting into the two seas on either side .
SOL OF THE PROVINCE OF GALLIA NARBONENSIS : That part of the Gallias which is washed by the inland sea is called the province of [ Gallia ] Narbonensis , having formerly borne the name of Braccata .
It is divided from Italy by the river Varus , and by the range of the Alps , the great safeguards of the Roman Empire .
From the remainder of Gaul , on the north , it is separated by the mountains Cebenna and Jura .
In the cultivation of the soil , the manners and civilization of the inhabitants , and the extent of its wealth , it is surpassed by none of the provinces , and , in short , might be more truthfully described as a part of Italy than as a province .
On the coast we have the district of the Sordones , and more inland that of the Consuarani .
The rivers are the Tecum and the Vernodubrum .
The towns are Illiberis , the scanty remains of what was formerly a great city , and Ruscino , a town with Latin rights .
We then come to the river Atax , which flows from the Pyrenees , and passes through the Rubrensian Lake , the town of Narbo Martius , a colony of the tenth legion , twelve miles distant from the sea , and the rivers Arauris and Liria .
The towns are otherwise but few in number , in consequence of the numerous lakes which skirt the sea-shore .
We have Agatha , formerly belonging to the Massilians , and the district of the Volcae Tectosages ; and there is the spot where Rhoda , a Rhodian colony , formerly stood , from which the river takes its name of Rhodanus ; a stream by far the most fertilizing of any in either of the Gallias .
Descending from the Alps and rushing through lake Lemanus , it carries along with it the sluggish Arar , as well as the torrents of the Isara and the Druentia , no less rapid than itself .
Its two smaller mouths are called Libica , one being the Spanish , and the other the Metapinian mouth ; the third and largest is called the Massiliotic .
There are some authors who state that there was formerly a town called Heraclea at the mouth of the Rhodanus or Rhone .
SOL Beyond this are the Canals leading out of the Rhone , a famous work of Caius Marius , and still distinguished by his name ; the Lake of Mastramela , the town of Maritima of the Avatici , and , above this , the Stony Plains , memorable for the battles of Hercules ; the district of the Anatilii , and more inland , that of the Desuviates and the Cavari .
Again , close upon the sea , there is that of the Tricorii , and inland , there are the Tricolli , the Vocontii , and the Segovellauni , and , after them , the Allobroges .
SOL On the coast is Massilia , a colony of Phocaean Greeks , and a federate city ; we then have the Promontory of Zao , the port of Citharista , and the district of the Camatullici ; then the Suelteri , and above them the Verrucini .
Again , on the coast , we find Athenopolis , belonging to the Massilians , Forum Julii Octavanorum , a colony , which is also called Pacensis and Classica , the river Argenteus , which flows through it , the district of the Oxubii and that of the Ligauni ; above whom are the Suetri , the Quariates and the Adunicates .
On the coast we have Antipolis , a town with Latin rights , the district of the Deciates , and the river Varus , which proceeds from Mount Cema , one of the Alps .
SOL The colonies in the interior are Arelate Sextanorum , Beterrae Septimanorum , and Arausio Secundanorum ; Valentia in the territory of the Cavari , and Vienne in that of the Allobroges .
The towns that enjoy Latin rights are Aquae Sextiae in the territory of the Saluvii , Avenio in that of the Cavari , Apta Julia in that of the Volgientes , Alebece in that of the Reii Apollinares , Alba in that of the Helvi , and Augusta in that of the Tricastini , Anatilia , Aeria , the Bormanni , the Comaci , Cabellio , Carcasum in the territory of the Volcae Tectosages , Cessero , Carpentoracte in the territory of the Memini , the Cenicenses , the Cambolectri , surnamed the Atlantici , Forum Voconi , Glanum Livi , the Lutevani , also called the Foroneronienses , Nemausum in the territory of the Arecomici , Piscenae , the Ruteni , the Sanagenses , the Tolosani in the territory of the Tectosages on the confines of Aquitania , the Tasconi , the Tarusconienses , the Umbranici , Vasio andLucus Augusti , the two capitals of the federate state of the Vocontii .
There are also nineteen towns of less note , as well as twenty-four belonging to the people of Nemausum .
To this list the Emperor Galba added two tribes dwelling among the Alps , the Avantici and the Bodiontici , to whom belongs the town of Dinia .
According to Agrippa the length of the province of Gallia Narbonensis is 370 miles , and its breadth 248 .
SOL OF ITALY : Next comes Italy , and we begin with the Ligures , after whom we have Etruria , Umbria , Latium , where the mouths of the Tiber are situate , and Rome , the Capital of the world , sixteen miles distant from the sea .
We then come to the coasts of the Volsci and of Campania , and the districts of Picenum , of Lucania , and of Bruttium , where Italy extends the farthest in a southerly direction , and projects into the [ two ] seas with the chain of the Alps , which there forms pretty nearly the shape of a crescent .
Leaving Bruttium we come to the coast of Graecia , then the Salentini , the Pediculi , the Apuli , the Peligni , the Frentani , the Marrucini , the Vestini , the Sabini , the Picentes , the Galli , the Umbri , the Tusci , the Veneti , the Carni , the Iapydes , the Histri , and the Liburni .
SOL I am by no means unaware that I might be justly accused of ingratitude and indolence , were I to describe thus briefly and in so cursory a manner the land which is at once the foster-child and the parent of all lands ; chosen by the providence of the Gods to render even heaven itself more glorious , to unite the scattered empires of the earth , to bestow a polish upon men 's manners , to unite the discordant and uncouth dialects of so many different nations by the powerful ties of one common language , to confer the enjoyments of discourse and of civilization upon mankind , to become , in short , the mother-country of all nations of the Earth .
SOL But how shall I commence this undertaking ?
So vast is the number of celebrated places ( what man living could enumerate them all ?) , and so great the renown attached to each individual nation and subject , that I feel myself quite at a loss .
The city of Rome alone , which forms a portion of it , a face well worthy of shoulders so beauteous , how large a work would it require for an appropriate description !
And then too the coast of Campania , taken singly by itself !
so blest with natural beauties and opulence , that it is evident that when nature formed it she took a delight in accumulating all her blessings in a single spot — how am I to do justice to it ?
And then the climate , with its eternal freshness and so replete with health and vitality , the sereneness of the weather so enchanting , the fields so fertile , the hill sides so sunny , the thickets so free from every danger , the groves so cool and shady , the forests with a vegetation so varying and so luxuriant , the breezes descending from so many a mountain , the fruitfulness of its grain , its vines , and its olives so transcendent ; its flocks with fleeces so noble , its bulls with necks so sinewy , its lakes recurring in never-ending succession , its numerous rivers and springs which refresh it with their waters on every side , its seas so many in number , its havens and the bosom of its lands opening everywhere to the commerce of all the world , and as it were eagerly stretching forth into the very midst of the waves , for the purpose of aiding as it were the endeavours of mortals !
SOL For the present I forbear to speak of its genius , its manners , its men , and the nations whom it has conquered by eloquence and force of arms .
The very Greeks themselves , a race fond in the extreme of expatiating on their own praises , have amply given judgment in its favour , when they named but a small part of it ' Magna Graecia .
' But we must be content to do on this occasion as we have done in our description of the heavens ; we must only touch upon some of these points , and take notice of but a few of its stars .
I only beg my readers to bear in mind that I am thus hastening on for the purpose of giving a general description of everything that is known to exist throughout the whole earth .
SOL I may premise by observing that this land very much resembles in shape an oak leaf , being much longer than it is broad ; towards the top it inclines to the left , while it terminates in the form of an Amazonian buckler , in which the spot at the central projection is the place called Cocinthos , while it sends forth two horns at the end of its crescent-shaped bays , Leucopetra on the right and Lacinium on the left .
It extends in length 1020 miles , if we measure from the foot of the Alps at Praetoria Augusta , through the city of Rome and Capua to the town of Rhegium , which is situate on the shoulder of the Peninsula , just at the bend of the neck as it were .
The distance would be much greater if measured to Lacinium , but in that case the line , being drawn obliquely , would incline too much to one side .
Its breadth is variable ; being 410 miles between the two seas , the Lower and the Upper , and the rivers Varus and Arsia : at about the middle , and in the vicinity of the city of Rome , from the spot where the river Aternus flows into the Adriatic sea , to the mouth of the Tiber , the distance is 136 miles , and a little less from Castrum-novum on the Adriatic sea to Alsium on the Tuscan ; but in no place does it exceed 200 miles in breadth .
The circuit of the whole , from the Varus to the Arsia , is 3059 miles .
SOL As to its distance from the countries that surround it Istria and Liburnia are , in some places , 100 miles from it , and Epirus and Illyricum 50 ; Africa is less than 200 , as we are informed by M. Varro ; Sardinia is 120 , Sicily 1 1 / 2 , Corsica less than 80 , and Issa 50 .
It extends into the two seas towards the southern parts of the heavens , or , to speak with more minute exactness , between the sixth hour and the first hour of the winter solstice .
SOL We will now describe its extent and its different cities ; in doing which , it is necessary to premise , that we shall follow the arrangement of the late Emperor Augustus , and adopt the division which he made of the whole of Italy into eleven districts ; taking them , however , according to their order on the sea-line , as in so hurried a detail it would not be possible otherwise to describe each city in juxtaposition with the others in its vicinity .
And for the same reason , in describing the interior , I shall follow the alphabetical order which has been adopted by that Emperor , pointing out the colonies of which he has made mention in his enumeration .
Nor is it a very easy task to trace their situation and origin ; for , not to speak of others , the Ingaunian Ligurians have had lands granted to them as many as thirty different times .
SOL OF THE NINTH REGION OF ITALY : To begin then with the river Varus ; we have the town of Nicaea , founded by the Massilians , the river Paulo , the Alps and the Alpine tribes , distinguished by various names , but more especially the Capillati , Cemenelio , a town of the state of the Vediantii , the port of Hercules Monaecus , and the Ligurian coast .
The more celebrated of the Ligurian tribes beyond the Alps are the Salluvii , the Deciates , and the Oxubii ; on this side of the Alps , the Veneni , and the Vagienni , who are derived from the Caturiges , the Statielli , the Bimbelli , the Magelli , the Euburiates , the Casmonates , the Veleiates , and the peoples whose towns we shall describe as lying near the adjoining coast .
The river Rutuba , the town of Albium Intemelium , the river Merula , the town of Albium Ingaunum , the port of Vadum Sabatiorum , the river Porcifera , the town of Genua , the river Feritor , the Portus Delphini , Tigullia , Tegesta of the Tigullii , and the river Macra , which is the boundary of Liguria .
SOL Extending behind all the before-mentioned places are the Apennines , the most considerable of all the mountains of Italy , the chain of which extends unbroken from the Alps to the Sicilian sea .
On the other side of the Apennines , towards the Padus , the richest river of Italy , the whole country is adorned with noble towns ; Libarna , the colony of Dertona , Iria , Barderate , Industria , Pollentia , Carrea Potentia , Foro Fulvi or Valentinum , Augusta of the Vagienni , Alba Pompeia , Asta , and Aquae Statiellorum .
This is the ninth region , according to the arrangement of Augustus .
The coast of Liguria extends 211 miles , between the rivers Varus and Macra .
SOL THE SEVENTH REGION OF ITALY : Next to this comes the seventh region , in which is Etruria , a district which begins at the river Macra , and has often changed its name .
At an early period the Umbri were expelled from it by the Pelasgi ; and these again by the Lydians , who from a king of theirs were named Tyrrheni , but afterwards , from the rites observed in their sacrifices , were called , in the Greek language , Tusci .
The first town in Etruria is Luna , with a noble harbour , then the colony of Luca , at some distance from the sea , and nearer to it again the colony of Pisae , between the rivers Auser and Arnus , which owes its origin to Pelops and the Pisans , or else to the Teutani , a people of Greece .
Next is Vada Volaterrana , then the river Cecinna , and Populonium formerly belonging to the Etrurians , the only town they had on this coast .
Next to these is the river Prile , then the Umbro , which is navigable , and where the district of Umbria begins , the port of Telamon , Cosa of the Volcientes , founded by the Roman people , Graviscae , Castrum novum , Pyrgi , the river Caeretanus , and Caere itself , four miles inland , called Agylla by the Pelasgi who founded it , Alsium , Fregenae , and the river Tiber , 284 miles from the Macra .
SOL In the interior we have the colonies of Falisci , founded by the Argives , according to the account of Cato , and surnamed Falisci Etruscorum , Lucus Feroniae , Rusellana , the Senienses , and Sutrina .
The remaining peoples are the Arretini Veteres , the Arretini Fidentes , the Arretini Julienses , the Amitinenses , the Aquenses , surnamed Taurini , the Blerani , the Cortonenses , the Capenates , the Clusini Novi , the Clusini Veteres , the Florentini , situated on the stream of the Arnus , Faesulae , Ferentinum , Fescennia , Hortanum , Herbanum , Nepeta , Novem Pagi , the Claudian praefecture of Foroclodium , Pistorium , Perusia , the Suanenses , the Saturnini , formerly called the Aurinini , the Subertani , the Statones , the Tarquinienses , the Tuscanienses , the Vetulonienses , the Veietani , the Vesentini , the Volaterrani , the Volcentini , surnamed Etrusci , and the Volsinienses .
In the same district the territories of Crustumerium and Caletra retain the names of the ancient towns .
SOL THE FIRST REGION OF ITALY ; THE TIBER ; ROME .
The Tiber or Tiberis , formerly called Thybris , and previously Albula , flows down from nearly the central part of the chain of the Apennines , in the territory of the Arretini .
It is at first small , and only navigable by means of sluices , in which the water is dammed up and then discharged , in the same manner as the Timia and the Glanis , which flow into it ; for which purpose it is found necessary to collect the water for nine days , unless there should happen to be a fall of rain .
And even then , the Tiber , by reason of its rugged and uneven channel , is really more suitable for navigation by rafts than by vessels , for any great distance .
It winds along for a course of 150 miles , passing not far from Tifernum , Perusia , and Ocriculum , and dividing Etruria from the Umbri and the Sabini , and then , at a distance of less than sixteen miles from the city , separating the territory of Veii from that of Crustuminum , and afterwards that of the Fidenates and of Latium from Vaticanum .
SOL Below its union with the Glanis from Arretinum the Tiber is swollen by two and forty streams , particularly the Nar and the Anio , which last is also navigable and shuts in Latium at the back ; it is also increased by the numerous aqueducts and springs which are conveyed to the City .
Here it becomes navigable by vessels of any burden which may come up from the Italian sea ; a most tranquil dispenser of the produce of all parts of the earth , and peopled and embellished along its banks with more villas than nearly all the other rivers of the world taken together .
And yet there is no river more circumscribed than it , so close are its banks shut in on either side ; but still , no resistance does it offer , although its waters frequently rise with great suddenness , and no part is more liable to be swollen than that which runs through the City itself .
In such case , however , the Tiber is rather to be looked upon as pregnant with prophetic warnings to us , and in its increase to be considered more as a promoter of religion than a source of devastation .
SOL Latium has preserved its original limits , from the Tiber to Circeii , a distance of fifty miles : so slender at the beginning were the roots from which this our Empire sprang .
Its inhabitants have been often changed , and different nations have peopled it at different times , the Aborigines , the Pelasgi , the Arcades , the Seculi , the Aurunci , the Rutuli , and , beyond Circeii , the Volsci , the Osci , and the Ausones whence the name of Latium came to be extended as far as the river Liris .
SOL We will begin with Ostia , a colony founded by a king of Rome , the town of Laurentum , the grove of Jupiter Indiges , the river Numicius , and Ardea , founded by Danae , the mother of Perseus .
Next come the former site of Aphrodisium , the colony of Antium , the river and island called Astura , the river Nymphaeus , the Clostra Romana , and Circeii , formerly an island , and , if we are to believe Homer , surrounded by the open sea , though now by an extensive plain .
The circumstances which we are enabled to publish on this subject for the information of the world are very remarkable .
Theophrastus , the first foreigner who treated of the affairs of Rome with any degree of accuracy ( for Theopompus , before whose time no Greek writer had made mention of us , only stated the fact that the city had been taken by the Gauls , and Clitarchus , the next after him , only spoke of the embassy that was sent by the Romans to Alexander ) — Theophrastus , I say , following something more than mere rumour , has given the circuit of the island of Circeii as being eighty stadia , in the volume which he wrote during the archonship of Nicodorus at Athens , being the 440th year of our city .
Whatever land therefore has been annexed to that island beyond the circumference of about ten miles , has been added to Italy since the year previously mentioned .
SOL Another wonderful circumstance too .
— Near Circeii are the Pomptine Marshes , formerly the site , according to Mucianus , who was thrice consul , of four-and-twenty cities .
Next to this comes the river Ufens , upon which is the town of Terracina , called , in the language of the Volsci , Anxur ; the spot too where Amyclae stood , a town destroyed by serpents .
Next is the site of the Grotto , Lake Fundanus , the port of Caieta , and then the town of Formiae , formerly called Hormiae , the ancient seat of the Laestrygones , it is supposed .
Beyond this , formerly stood the town of Pyrae ; and we then come to the colony of Minturnae , which still exists , and is divided by the river Liris , also called the Glanis .
The town of Sinuessa is the last in the portion which has been added to Latium ; it is said by some that it used to be called Sinope .
SOL At this spot begins that blessed country Campania , and in this vale first take their rise those hills clad with vines , the juice of whose grape is extolled by Fame all over the world ; the happy spot where , as the ancients used to say , father Liber and Ceres are ever striving for the mastery .
Hence the fields of Setia and of Caecubum extend afar , and , next to them those of Falernum and of Calinum .
As soon as we have passed these , the hills of Massica , of Gaurus , and of Surrentum rise to our view .
Next , the level plains of Laborium are spread out far and wide , where every care is bestowed on cultivating crops of spelt , from which the most delicate fermenty is made .
These shores are watered by warm springs , while the seas are distinguished beyond all others for the superlative excellence of their shell and other fish .
In no country too has the oil of the olive a more exquisite flavour .
This territory , a battle-ground as it were for the gratification of every luxurious pleasure of man , has been held successively by the Osci , the Greeks , the Umbri , the Tusci , and the Campani .
SOL On the coast we first meet with the river Savo , the town of Volturnum with a river of the same name , the town of Liternum , Cumae , a Chalcidian colony , Misenum , the port of Baiae , Bauli , the Lucrine Lake , and Lake Avernus , near which there stood formerly a town of the Cimmerians .
We then come to Puteoli , formerly called the colony of Dicaearchia , then the Phlegraean Plains , and the Marsh of Acherusia in the vicinity of Cumae .
SOL Again , on the coast we have Neapolis , also a colony of the Chalcidians , and called Parthenope from the tomb there of one of the Sirens , Herculaneum , Pompeii , from which Mount Vesuvius may be seen at no great distance , and which is watered by the river Sarnus ; the territory of Nuceria , and , at the distance of nine miles from the sea , the town of that name , and then Surrentum , with the Promontory of Minerva , formerly the abode of the Sirens .
The distance thence by sea to Circeii is seventy-eight miles .
This region , beginning at the Tiber , is looked upon as the first of Italy according to the division of Augustus .
SOL Inland there are the following colonies : — Capua , so called from its champaign country , Aquinum , Suessa , Venafrum , Sora , Teanum surnamed Sidicinum , Nola ; and the towns of Abella , Aricia , Alba Longa , the Acerrani , the Allifani , the Atinates , the Aletrinates , the Anagnini , the Atellani , the Affilani , the Arpinates , the Auximates , the Abellani , the Alfaterni ( both those who take their names from the Latin , the Hernican and the Labicanian territory ) , Bovillae , Calatia , Casinum , Calenum , Capitulum of the Hernici , the Cereatini , surnamed Mariani , the Corani , descended from the Trojan Dardanus , the Cubulterini , the Castrimoenienses , the Cingulani , the Fabienses on the Alban Mount , the Foropopulienses of the Falernian district , the Frusinates , the Ferentinates , the Freginates , the old Frabaterni , the new Frabaterni , the Ficolenses , the Fregellani , Forum Appi , the Forentani , the Gabini , the Interamnates Succasini , also surnamed Lirinates , the Ilionenses Lavinii , the Norbani , the Nomentani , the Praenestini ( whose city was formerly called Stephane ) , the Privernates , the Setini , the Signini , the Suessulani , the Telesini , the Trebulani , surnamed Balinienses , the Trebani , the Tusculani , the Verulani , the Veliterni , the Ulubrenses , the Urbinates , and , last and greater than all , Rome herself , whose other name the hallowed mysteries of the sacred rites forbid us to mention without being guilty of the greatest impiety .
After it had been long kept buried in secrecy with the strictest fidelity and in respectful and salutary silence , Valerius Soranus dared to divulge it , but soon did he pay the penalty of his rashness .
SOL It will not perhaps be altogether foreign to the purpose , if I here make mention of one peculiar institution of our forefathers which bears especial reference to the inculcation of silence on religious matters .
The goddess Angerona , to whom sacrifice is offered on the twelfth day before the calends of January [ 21st December ] , is represented in her statue as having her mouth bound with a sealed fillet .
SOL Romulus left the city of Rome , if we are to believe those who state the very greatest number , having three gates and no more .
When the Vespasians were emperors and censors , in the year from its building 826 [ 73 CE ] , the circumference of the walls which surrounded it was thirteen miles and two-fifths .
Surrounding as it does the Seven Hills , the city is divided into fourteen districts , with 265 cross-roads under the guardianship of the Lares .
If a straight line is drawn from the mile-column placed at the entrance of the Forum , to each of the gates , which are at present thirty-seven in number ( taking care to count only once the twelve double gates , and to omit the seven old ones , which no longer exist ) , the result will be [ taking them altogether ] , a straight line of twenty miles and 765 paces .
But if we draw a straight line from the same mile-column to the very last of the houses , including therein the Praetorian encampment , and follow throughout the line of all the streets , the result will then be something more than seventy miles .
Add to these calculations the height of the houses , and then a person may form a fair idea of this city , and will certainly be obliged to admit that there is not a place throughout the whole world that for size can be compared to it .
On the eastern side it is bounded by the agger of Tarquinius Superbus , a work of surpassing grandeur ; for he raised it so high as to be on a level with the walls on the side on which the city lay most exposed to attack from the neighbouring plains .
On all the other sides it has been fortified either with lofty walls or steep and precipitous hills , but so it is , that its buildings , increasing and extending beyond all bounds , have now united many other cities to it .
SOL Besides those previously mentioned , there were formerly in the first region the following famous towns of Latium : Satricum , Pometia , Scaptia , Politorium , Tellene , Tifata , Caenina , Ficana , Crustumerium , Ameriola , Medullum , Corniculum , Saturnia , on the site of the present city of Rome , Antipolis , now Janiculum , forming part of Rome , Antemnae , Carnerium , Collatia , Amitinum , Norbe , Sulmo , and , with these , those Alban nations who used to take part in the sacrifices upon the Alban Mount , the Albani , the Aesulani , the Accienses , the Abolani , the Bubetani , the Bolani , the Cusuetani , the Coriolani , the Fidenates , the Foretii , the Hortenses , the Latinienses , the Longulani , the Manates , the Macrales , the Mutucumenses , the Munienses , the Numinienses , the Olliculani , the Octulani , the Pedani , the Polluscini , the Querquetulani , the Sicani , the Sisolenses , the Tolerienses , the Tutienses , the Vimitellarii , the Velienses , the Venetulani , and the Vitellenses .
Thus we see , fifty-three peoples of ancient Latium have passed away without leaving any traces of their existence .
SOL In the Campanian territory there was also the town of Stabiae , until the consulship of Cneius Pompeius and L. Cato , when , on the day before the calends of May [ 30th of April ] , it was destroyed in the Social War by L. Sulla the legatus , and all that now stands on its site is a single farmhouse .
Here also Taurania has ceased to exist , and the remains of Casilinum are fast going to ruin .
Besides these , we learn from Valerius Antias that king L .
Tarquinius took Apiolae , a town of the Latins , and with its spoils laid the first foundations of the Capitol .
From Surrentum to the river Silarus , the former territory of Picentia extends for a distance of thirty miles .
This belonged to the Etruscans , and was remarkable for the temple of the Argive Juno , founded by Jason .
In it was Picentia , a town of the territory of Salernum .
SOL THE THIRD REGION OF ITALY : At the Silarus begins the third region of Italy , consisting of the territory of Lucania and Bruttium ; here too there have been no few changes of the population .
These districts have been possessed by the Pelasgi , the Oenotrii , the Itali , the Morgetes , the Siculi , and more especially by people who emigrated from Greece , and , last of all , by the Leucani , a people sprung from the Samnites , who took possession under the command of Lucius .
We find here the town of Paestum , which received from the Greeks the name of Posidonia , the Gulf of Paestum , the town of Elea , now known as Velia , and the Promontory of Palinurum , a point at which the land falls inwards and forms a bay , the distance across which to the pillar of Rhegium is 100 miles .
Next after Palinurum comes the river Melpes , then the town of Buxentum , called in Graecia Pyxus , and the river Laus ; there was formerly a town also of the same name .
SOL At this spot begins the coast of Bruttium , and we come to the town of Blanda , the river Batum , Parthenius , a port of the Phocians , the bay of Vibo , the place where Clampetia formerly stood , the town of Temsa , called Temese by the Greeks , and Terina founded by the people of Crotona , with the extensive Gulf of Terina ; more inland , the town of Consentia .
Situated upon a peninsula is the river Acheron , from which the people of Acherontia derive the name of their town ; then Hippo , now called Vibo Valentia , the Port of Hercules , the river Metaurus , the town of Tauroentum , the Port of Orestes , and Medma .
Next , the town of Scyllaion , the river Crataeis , the mother of Scylla it is said ; then the Pillar of Rhegium , the Straits of Sicily , and the two promontories which face each other , Caenys on the Italian , and Pelorus on the Sicilian side , the distance between them being twelve stadia .
At a distance thence of twelve miles and a half , we come to Rhegium , after which begins Sila , a forest of the Apennines , and then the promontory of Leucopetra , at a distance of fifteen miles ; after which come the Locri , who take their surname from the promontory of Zephyrium , being distant from the river Silarus 303 miles .
SOL At this spot ends the first great Gulf of Europe ; the seas in which bear the following names : — That from which it takes its rise is called the Atlantic , by some the Great Atlantic , the entrance of which is , by the Greeks , called Porthmos , by us the Straits of Gades .
After its entrance , as far as it washes the coasts of Spain , it is called the Hispanian Sea , though some give it the name of the Iberian or Balearic Sea .
Where it faces the province of Gallia Narbonensis it has the name of the Gallic , and after that , of the Ligurian , Sea .
From Liguria to the island of Sicily , it is called the Tuscan sea , the same which is called by some of the Greeks the Notian , by others the Tyrrhenian sea , while many of our people call it the Lower Sea .
Beyond Sicily , as far as the country of the Salentini , it is styled by Polybius the Ausonian Sea .
Eratosthenes however gives to the whole expanse that lies between the inlet of the ocean and the island of Sardinia , the name of the Sardoan Sea ; thence to Sicily , the Tyrrhenian sea ; thence to Crete , the Sicilian ; and beyond that island , the Cretan Sea .
SOL SIXTY-FOUR ISLANDS , among which are the Baleares .
The first islands that we meet with in all these seas are the two to which the Greeks have given the name of Pityussae , from the pine-tree , which they produce .
These islands now bear the name of Ebusus , and form a federate state .
They are separated by a narrow strait of the sea , and are forty-six miles in extent .
They are distant from Dianium 700 stadia , Dianium being by land the same distance from New Carthage .
At the same distance from the Pityussae , lie , in the open sea , the two Baleares , and , over against the river Sucro , Colubraria .
The Baleares , so formidable in war with their slingers , have received from the Greeks the name of Gymnasiae .
SOL The larger island is 100 miles in length , and 475 in circumference .
It has the following towns ; Palma and Pollentia , enjoying the rights of Roman citizens , Cinium and Tucis , with Latin rights : Bocchorum , a federate town , is no longer in existence .
At thirty miles' distance is the smaller island , 40 miles in length , and 150 in circumference ; it contains the states of Jamnon , Sanisera , and Magon .
SOL In the open sea , at twelve miles' distance from the larger island , is Capraria with its treacherous coast , so notorious for its numerous shipwrecks ; and , opposite to the city of Palma , are the islands known as the Maenariae , Tiquadra , and Little Hannibalis .
SOL The earth of Ebusus has the effect of driving away serpents , while that of Colubraria produces them ; hence the latter spot is dangerous to all persons who have not brought with them some of the earth of Ebusus .
The Greeks have given it the name of Ophiusa .
Ebusus too produces no rabbits to destroy the harvests of the Baleares .
There are also about twenty other small islands in this sea , which is full of shoals .
Off the coast of Gaul , at the mouth of the Rhodanus , there is Metina , and near it the island which is known as Blascon , with the three Stoechades , so called by their neighbours the Massilians , on account of the regular order in which they are placed ; their respective names are Prote , Mese , also called Pomponiana , and Hypaea .
After these come Sturium , Phoenice , Phila , Lero , and , opposite to Antipolis , Lerina , where there is a remembrance of a town called Vergoanum having once existed .
SOL CORSICA : In the Ligurian Sea , but close to the Tuscan , is Corsica , by the Greeks called Cyrnos , extending , from north to south 150 miles , and for the most part 50 miles in breadth , its circumference being 325 .
It is 62 miles distant from the Vada Volaterrana .
It contains thirty-two states , and two colonies , that of Mariana , founded by C. Marius , and that of Aleria , founded by the Dictator Sulla .
On this side of it is Oglasa , and , at a distance of less than sixty miles from Corsica , Planaria , so called from its appearance , being nearly level with the sea , and consequently treacherous to mariners .
SOL We next have Urgo , a larger island , and Capraria , which the Greeks have called Aegilion ; then Igilium and Dianium , which they have also called Artemisia , both of them opposite the coast of Cosa ; also Barpana , Maenaria , Columbaria , and Venaria .
We then come to Ilva with its iron mines , an island 100 miles in circumference , 10 miles distant from Populonium , and called Aethalia by the Greeks : from it the island of Planasia is distant 28 miles .
After these , beyond the mouths of the Tiber , and off the coast of Antium , we come to Astura , then Palmaria and Sinonia , and , opposite to Formiae , Pontiae .
In the Gulf of Puteoli are Pandateria , and Prochyta , so called , not from the nurse of Aeneas , but because it has been poured forth or detached from Aenaria , an island which received its name from having been the anchorage of the fleet of Aeneas , though called by Homer Inarime ; it is also called Pithecusa , not , as many have fancied , on account of the multitudes of apes found there , but from its extensive manufactories of pottery .
Between Pausilipum and Neapolis lies the island of Megaris , and then , at a distance of eight miles from Surrentum , Capreae , famous for the castle of the emperor Tiberius : it is eleven miles in circumference .
SOL SARDINIA : Leucothea comes next , and after it , but out of sight , as it lies upon the verge of the African Sea , Sardinia .
It is situate somewhat less than eight miles from the nearest point of Corsica , and the Straits between them are even still more reduced by the small islands there situate , called the Cuniculariae , as also those of Phintonis and Fossae , from which last the Straits themselves have obtained the name of Taphros .
SOL Sardinia extends , upon the east side , a distance of 188 miles , on the west 175 , on the south 77 , and on the north 125 , being 565 miles in circumference .
Its promontory of Caralis is distant from Africa 200 , and from Gades 1400 miles .
Off the promontory of Gordis it has two islands called the Isles of Hercules , off that of Sulcis , the island of Enosis , and off that of Caralis , Ficaria .
Some writers place Beleris not far from it , as also Callodis , and the island known as Heras Loutra .
SOL The most celebrated peoples of this island are the Ilienses , the Balari , and the Corsi ; and among its eighteen towns , there are those of the Sulcitani , the Valentini , the Neapolitani , the Bosenses , the Caralitani , who enjoy the rights of Roman citizens , and the Norenses .
There is also one colony which is called Ad Turrim Libysonis .
Timaeus has called this island Sandaliotis , on account of the similarity of its shape to the sole of a shoe , while Myrtilus has given it the name of Ichnusa , from its resemblance to the print of a footstep .
Opposite to the Gulf of Paestum is Leucasia , so called from a Siren who is buried there ; opposite to Velia are Poiitia and Isacia , both known by one name , that of Oenotrides , a proof that Italy was formerly possessed by the Oenotrians .
Opposite to Vibo are the little islands called Ithacesiae from the watch-tower of Ulysses situate there .
SOL SICILY : But more celebrated than all is Sicily , called Sicania by Thucydides , and by many writers Trinacria or Trinacia , from its triangular appearance .
According to Agrippa it is 618 miles in circumference .
In former times it was a continuation of the territory of Bruttium , but , in consequence of the overflowing of the sea , became severed from it ; thus forming a strait of 15 miles in length , and a mile and a half in width in the vicinity of the Pillar of Rhegium .
It was from this circumstance of the land being severed asunder that the Greeks gave the name of Rhegium to the town situate on the Italian shore .
SOL In these Straits is the rock of Scylla , as also Charybdis , a whirlpool of the sea , both of them noted for their perils .
Of this triangle , the promontory , which , as we have already mentioned , is called Pelorus , faces Scylla and juts out towards Italy , while Pachynum extends in the direction of Greece , Peloponnesus being at a distance from it of 440 miles , and Lilybaion , towards Africa , being distant 180 miles from the promontory of Mercury , and from that of Caralis in Sardinia 190 .
These promontories and sides are situate at the following distances from each other : by land it is 186 miles from Pelorus to Pachynum , from Pachynum to Lilybaion 200 , and from Lilybaion to Pelorus 170 .
SOL In this island there are five colonies and sixty-three cities or states .
Leaving Pelorus and facing the Ionian Sea , we have the town of Messana , whose inhabitants are also called Mamertini and enjoy the rights of Roman citizens ; the promontory of Drepanum , the colony of Tauromenium , formerly called Naxos , the river Asines , and Mount Aetna , wondrous for the flames which it emits by night .
Its crater is twenty stadia in circumference , and from it red-hot cinders are thrown as far as Tauromenium and Catina , the noise being heard even at Maroneum and the Gemellian Hills .
We then come to the three rocks of the Cyclopes , the Port of Ulysses , the colony of Catina , and the rivers Symaethus and Terias ; while more inland lie the Laestrygonian Plains .
SOL To these rivers succeed the towns of Leontinum and Megaris , the river Pantagies , the colony of Syracuse , with the fountain of Arethusa , ( the people in the Syracusan territory drink too of the fountains of Temenitis , Archidemia , Magaea , Cyane , and Milichie ,) the port of Naustathmus , the river Elorus , and the promontory of Pachynum .
This side of Sicily begins with the river Hirminius , then follow the town of Camarina , the river Gelas , and the town of Agragas , which our people have named Agrigentum .
We next come to the colony of Thermae , the rivers Achates , Mazara , and Hypsa ; the town of Selinus , and then the Promontory of Lilybaion , which is succeeded by Drepana , Mount Eryx , the towns of Panhormus , Solus and Himera , with a river of the same name , Cephaloedis , Aluntium , Agathyrnum , the colony of Tyndaris , the town of Mylae , and then Pelorus , the spot at which we began .
SOL In the interior there are the following towns enjoying Latin privileges , those of the Centuripini , the Netini , and the Segestani ; tributary towns are those of the Assorini , the Aetnenses , the Agyrini , the Acestaei , the Acrenses , the Bidini , the Cetarini , the Cacyrini , the Drepanitani , the Ergetini , the Echetlienses , the Erycini , the Entellini , the Enini , the Enguini , the Gelani , the Galatini , the Halesini , the Hennenses , the Hyblenses , the Herbitenses , the Herbessenses , the Herbulenses , the Halicyenses , the Hadranitani , the Imacarenses , the Ipanenses , the Ietenses , the Mytistratini , the Magellini , the Murgentini , the Mutycenses , the Menanini , the Naxii , the Noaei , the Petrini , the Paropini , the Phthinthienses , the Semellitani , the Scherini , the Selinuntii , the Symaethii , the Talarienses , the Tissinenses , the Triocalini , the Tyracinenses , and the Zanclaei , a Messenian colony on the Straits of Sicily .
Towards Africa , its islands are Gaulos , Melita , 87 miles from Camerina , and 113 from Lilybaion , Cosyra , Hieronnesos , Caene , Galata , Lopadusa , Aethusa , written by some Aegusa , Bucinna , Osteodes , distant from Soluntum 75 miles , and , opposite to Paropus , Ustica .
SOL On this side of Sicily , facing the river Metaurus , at a distance of nearly 25 miles from Italy , are the seven islands called the Aeolian , as also the Liparaean islands ; by the Greeks they are called the Hephaestiades , and by our writers the Vulcanian Isles ; they are called " Aeolian " because in the Trojan times Aeolus was king there .
SOL ( 9 .
) Lipara , with a town whose inhabitants enjoy the rights of Roman citizens , is so called from Liparus , a former king who succeeded Aeolus , it having been previously called Melogonis or Meligunis .
It is 25 miles distant from Italy , and in circumference a little less .
Between this island and Sicily we find another , the name of which was formerly Therasia , but now called Hiera , because it is sacred to Vulcan : it contains a hill which at night vomits forth flames .
The third island is Strongyle , lying one mile to the east of Lipara , over which Aeolus reigned as well ; it differs only from Lipara in the superior brilliancy of its flames .
From the smoke of this volcano it is said that some of the inhabitants are able to predict three days beforehand what winds are about to blow ; hence arose the notion that the winds are governed by Aeolus .
The fourth of these islands is Didyme , smaller than Lipara , the fifth Ericusa , the sixth Phoenicusa , left to be a pasture-ground for the cattle of the neighbouring islands , and the last and smallest Euonymos .
Thus much as to the first great Gulf of Europe .
SOL MAGNA GRAECIA , BEGINNING AT LOCRI : At Locri begins the fore-part of Italy , called Magna Graecia , whose coast falls back in three bays formed by the Ausonian sea , so called from the Ausones , who were the first inhabitants of the country .
According to Varro it is 86 miles in extent ; but most writers have made it only 75 .
Along this coast there are rivers innumerable , but we shall mention those only that are worthy of remark .
After leaving Locri we come to the Sagra , and the ruins of the town of Caulon , Mystiae , Consilinum Castrum , Cocinthum , in the opinion of some , the longest headland of Italy , and then the Gulf of Scylacium , and Scylacium itself , which was called by the Athenians , when they founded it , Scylletium .
This part of Italy is nearly a peninsula , in consequence of the Gulf of Terinaion running up into it on the other side ; in it there is a harbour called Castra < Hannibalis : in no part is Italy narrower than here , it being but twenty miles across .
For this reason the Elder Dionysius entertained the idea of severing this portion from the main-land of Italy at this spot , and adding it to Sicily .
The navigable rivers in this district are the Carcines , the Crotalus , the Semirus , the Arocas , and the Targines .
In the interior is the town of Petilia , and there are besides , Mount Clibanus , the promontory of Lacinium , in front of which lies the island of Dioscoron , ten miles from the mainland , and another called the Isle of Calypso , which Homer is supposed to refer to under the name of Ogygia ; as also the islands of Tiris , Eranusa , and Meloessa .
According to Agrippa , the promontory of Lacinium is seventy miles from Caulon .
SOL At the promontory of Lacinium begins the second Gulf of Europe , the bend of which forms an are of great depth , and terminates at Acroceraunium , a promontory of Epirus , from which it is distant seventy-five miles .
We first come to the town of Croton , and then the river Neaethus , and the town of Thurii , situate between the two rivers Crathis and Sybaris , upon the latter of which there was once a city of the same name .
In a similar manner Heraclia , sometimes called Siris , lies between the river of that name and the Aciris .
We next come to the rivers Acalandrus and Casuentum , and the town of Metapontum , with which the third region of Italy terminates .
In the interior of Bruttium , the Aprustani are the only people ; but in Lucania we find the Atinates , the Bantini , the Eburini , the Grumentini , the Potentini , the Sontini , the Sirini , the Tergilani , the Ursentini , and the Volcentani , whom the Numestrani join .
Besides these , we learn from Cato that Thebes in Lucania has disappeared , and Theopompus informs us that there was formerly a city of the Lucani called Pandosia , at which Alexander , the king of Epirus , died .
SOL THE SECOND REGION OF ITALY : Adjoining to this district is the second region of Italy , which embraces the Hirpini , Calabria , Apulia , and the Salentini , extending a distance of 250 miles along the Gulf of Tarentum , which receives its name from a town of the Laconians so called , situate at the bottom of the Gulf ; to which was annexed the maritime colony which had previously settled there .
Tarentum is distant from the promontory of Lacinium 136 miles , and throws out the territory of Calabria opposite to it in the form of a peninsula .
The Greeks called this territory Messapia , from their leader ; before which it was called Peucetia , from Peucetius , the brother of Oenotrius , and was comprised in the Sallentine territory .
Between the two promontories there is a distance of 100 miles .
The breadth across the peninsula from Tarentum to Brundusium by land is 35 miles , considerably less if measured from the port of Sasina .
The towns inland from Tarentum are Uria surnamed Apulia , Messapia , and Aletium ; on the coast , Senum , and Callipolis , now known as Anxa , 75 miles from Tarentum .
Thence , at a distance of 32 miles , is the Promontory called Acra Iapygia , at which point Italy projects the greatest distance into the sea .
At a distance of 19 miles from this point is the town of Basta , and then Hydruntum , the spot at which the Ionian is separated from the Adriatic sea , and from which the distance across to Greece is the shortest .
The town of the Apolloniates lies opposite to it , and the breadth of the arm of the sea which runs between is not more than fifty miles .
Pyrrhus , king of Epirus , was the first who entertained the notion of uniting these two points and making a passage on foot , by throwing a bridge across , and after him M .
Varro , when commanding the fleet of Pompey in the war against the Pirates .
Other cares however prevented either of them from accomplishing this design .
Passing Hydruntum , we come to the deserted site of Soletum , then Fratuertium , the Portus Tarentinus , the haven of Miltopa , Lupia , Balesium , Caelia , and then Brundisium , fifty miles from Hydruntum .
This last place is one of the most famous ports of Italy , and , although more distant , affords by far the safest passage across to Greece , the place of disembarkation being Dyrrachium , a city of Illyria ; the distance across is 225 miles .
SOL Adjoining Brundusium is the territory of the Pediculi ; nine youths and as many maidens , natives of Illyria , became the parents of sixteen nations .
The towns of the Pediculi are Rudiae , Egnatia , and Barium ; their rivers are the Iapyx ( so called from the son of Daedalus , who was king there , and who gave it the name of Iapygia ) , the Pactius , and the Aufidus , which rises in the Hirpinian mountains and flows past Canusium .
SOL At this point begins Apulia , surnamed the Daunian , from the Daunii , who take their name from a former chief , the father-in-law of Diomedes .
In this territory are the towns of Salapia , famous for Hannibal 's amour with a courtezan , Sipontum , Uria , the river Cerbalus , forming the boundary of the Daunii , the port of Agasus , and the Promontory of Mount Garganus , distant from the SallentinePromontory or Iapygia 234 miles .
Making the circuit of Garganus , we come to the port of Garna , the Lake Pantanus , the river Frento , the mouth of which forms a harbour , Teanum of the Apuli , and Larinum , Cliternia , and the river Tifernus , at which the district of the Frentani begins .
Thus there were three different nations of the Apulians , [ the Daunii , ] the Teani , so called from their leader , and who sprang from the Greeks , and the Lucani , who were subdued by Calchas , and whose country is now possessed by the Atinates .
Besides those already mentioned , there are , of the Daunii , the colonies of Luceria and Venusia , the towns of Canusium and Arpi , formerly called Argos Hippium and founded by Diomedes , afterwards called Argyrippa .
Here too Diomedes destroyed the nations of the Monadi and the Dardi , and the two cities of Apina and Trica , whose names have passed into a by-word and a proverb .
SOL Besides the above , there is in the interior of the second region one colony of the Hirpini , Beneventum , so called by an exchange of a more auspicious name for its old one of Maleventum ; also the Aeculani the Aquilonii , the Abellinates surnamed Protropi , the Compsani , the Caudini , the Ligures , both those called the Corneliani and Bebiani , the Vescellani , the Aeclani , the Aletrini , the Abellinates surnamed Marsi , the Atrani , the Aecani , the Alfellani , the Atinates , the Arpani , the Borcani , the Collatni , the Corinenses , the Cannenses , rendered famous by the defeat of the Romans , the Dirini , the Forentani , the Genusini , the Herdonienses , the Hyrini , the Larinates surnamed Frentani , the Merinates of Garganus , the Mateolani , the Netini , the Rubustini , the Silvini , the Strapellini , the Turmentini , the Vibinates , the Venusini , and the Ulurtini .
In the interior of Calabria there are the Aegetini , the Apamestini , the Argentini , the Butuntinenses , the Deciani , the Grumbestini , the Norbanenses , the Palionenses , the Sturnini , and the Tutini : there are also the following Salentine nations ; the Aletini , the Basterbini , the Neretini , the Uxentini , and the Veretini .
SOL THE FOURTH REGION OF ITALY : We now come to the fourth region , which includes the most valiant probably of all the nations of Italy .
Upon the coast , in the territory of the Frentani , after the river Tifernus , we find the river Trinium , with a good harbour at its mouth , the towns of Histonium , Buca , and Ortona , and the river Aternus .
In the interior are the Anxani surnamed Frentani , the Higher and Lower Carentini , and the Lanuenses ; in the territory of the Marrucini , the Teatini ; in that of the Peligni , the Corfinienses , the Superaequani , and the Sulmonenses ; in that of the Marsi , the Anxantini , the Atinates , the Fucentes , the Lucenses , and the Marruvini ; in that of the Albenses , the town of Alba on Lake Fucinus ; in that of the Aequiculani , the Cliternini , and the Carseolani ; in that of the Vestini , the Angulani , the Pinnenses , and the Peltuinates , adjoining to whom are the Aufinates Cismontani ; in that of the Samnites , who have been called Sabelli , and whom the Greeks have called Saunitae , the colony of old Bovianum , and that of the Undecumani , the Aufidenates , the Esernini , the Fagifulani , the Ficolenses , the Saepinates , and the Tereventinates ; in that of the Sabini , the Amiternini , the Curenses , Forum Deci , Forum Novum , the Fidenates , the Interamnates , the Nursini , the Nomentani , the Reatini , the Trebulani , both those called Mutusci and those called Suffenates , the Tiburtes , and the Tarinates .
SOL In these districts , the Comini , the Tadiates , the Caedici , and the Alfaterni , tribes of the Aequiculi , have disappeared .
From Gellianus we learn that Archippe , a town of the Marsi , built by Marsyas , a chieftain of the Lydians , has been swallowed up by Lake Fucinus , and Valerianus informs us that the town of the Viticini in Picenum was destroyed by the Romans .
The Sabini ( called , according to some writers , from their attention to religious observances and the worship of the gods , Sevini ) dwell on the dew-clad hills in the vicinity of the Lakes of the Velinus .
The Nar , with its sulphureous waters , exhausts these lakes , and , descending from Mount Fiscellus , unites with them near the groves of Vacuna and Reate , and then directs its course towards the Tiber , into which it discharges itself .
Again , in another direction , the Anio , taking its rise in the mountain of the Trebani , carries into the Tiber the waters of three lakes remarkable for their picturesque beauty , and to which Sublaqueum is indebted for its name .
In the territory of Reate is the Lake of Cutiliae , in which there is a floating island , and which , according to M .
Varro , is the navel or central point of Italy .
Below the Sabine territory lies that of Latium , on one side Picenum , and behind it Umbria , while the range of the Apennines flanks it on either side .
SOL THE FIFTH REGION OF ITALY : The fifth region is that of Picenum , once remarkable for the denseness of its population ; 360,000 Picentines took the oaths of fidelity to the Roman people .
They are descended from the Sabines , who had made a vow to celebrate a holy spring .
Their territory commenced at the river Aternus , where the present district and colony of Adria is , at a distance of six miles from the sea .
Here we find the river Vomanus , the territories of Praetutia and Palma , Castrum Novum , the river Batinus ; Truentum , with its river of the same name , which place is the only remnant of the Liburni in Italy ; the river Albula ; Tervium , at which the Praetutian district ends , and that of Picenum begins ; the town of Cupra , Castellum Firmanorum , and above it the colony of Asculum , the most illustrious in Picenum ; in the interior there is the town of Novana .
Upon the coast we have Cluana , Potentia , Numana , founded by the Siculi , and Ancona , a colony founded by the same people on the Promontory of Cumerus , forming an elbow of the coast , where it begins to bend inwards , and distant from Garganus 183 miles .
In the interior are the Auximates , the Beregrani , the Cingulani , the Cuprenses surnamed Montani , the Falarienses , the Pausulani , the Planinenses , the Ricinenses , the Septempedani , the Tollentinates , the Treienses , and the Pollentini of Urbs Salvia .
SOL THE SIXTH REGION OF ITALY : Adjoining to this is the sixth region , which includes Umbria and the Gallic territory in the vicinity of Ariminum .
At Ancona begins the coast of that part of Gaul known as Gallia Togata .
The Siculi and the Liburni possessed the greater part of this district , and more particularly the territories of Palma , of Praetutia , and of Adria .
These were expelled by the Umbri , these again by the Etrurians , and these in their turn by the Gauls .
The Umbri are thought to have been the most ancient race in Italy , it being supposed that they were called " Ombrii " by the Greeks , from the fact of their having survived the rains which had inundated the earth .
We read that 300 of their towns were conquered by the Tusci ; at the present day we find on their coast the river Aesis , Senogallia , the river Metaurus , the colonies of Fanum Fortunae and Pisaurum , with a river of the same name ; and , in the interior , those of Hispellum and Tuder .
SOL Besides the above , there are the Amerini , the Attidiates , the Asisinates , the Arnates , the Aesinates , the Camertes , the Casuentillani , the Carsulani , the Dolates surnamed Salentini , the Fulginiates , the Foroflaminienses , the Forojulienses surnamed Concupienses , the Forobrentani , the Forosempronienses , the Iguvini , the Interamnates surnamed Nartes , the Mevanates , the Mevanionenses , the Matilicates , the Narnienses , whose town used formerly to be called Nequinum ; the Nucerini , both those surnamed Favonienses and those called Camellani ; the Ocriculani , the Ostrani , the Pitulani , both those surnamed Pisuertes and the others called Mergentini ; the Plestini , the Sentinates , the Sarsinates , the Spoletini , the Suasini , the Sestinates , the Suillates , the Tadinates , the Trebiates , the Tuficani , the Tifernates surnamed Tiberini , and the others called Metaurenses , the Vesinicates , the Urbinates , both those surnamed Metaurenses and the others called Hortenses , the Vettonenses , the Vindinates , and the Viventani .
In this district there exist no longer the Feliginates who possessed Clusiolum above Interamna , and the Sarranates , with their towns of Acerrae , surnamed Vafriae , and Turocelum , also called Vettiolum ; as also the Solinates , the Curiates , the Fallienates , and the Apiennates .
The Arienates also have disappeared with the town of Crinovolum , as well as the Usidicani , the Plangenses , the Paesinates , and the Caelestini .
Cato writes that Ameria above-mentioned was founded 964 years before the war with Perseus .
SOL THE EIGHTH REGION OF ITALY ; THE PADUS .
The eighth region is bounded by Ariminum , the Padus , and the Apennines .
Upon the coast we have the river Crustumium , and the colony of Ariminum , with the rivers Ariminus and Aprusa .
Next comes the river Rubicon , once the boundary of Italy , and after it the Sapis , the Vitis , and the Anemo , and then , Ravenna , a town of the Sabines , with the river Bedesis , 105 miles from Ancona ; and , not far from the sea , Butrium , a town of the Umbri .
In the interior there are the colonies of Bononia , formerly called Felsina , when it was the chief place of Etruria , Brixillum , Mutina , Parma , and Placentia .
There are also the towns of Caesena , Claterna , Forum Clodi , Forum Livi , Forum Popili , Forum Truentinorum , Forum Corneli , Forum Licini , the Faventini , the Fidentini , the Otesini , the Padinates , the Regienses , who take their name from Lepidus , the Solonates , the Saltus Galliani , surnamed Aquinates , the Tannetani , the Veliates , who were anciently surnamed Regiates , and the Urbanates .
In this district the Boii have disappeared , of whom there were 112 tribes according to Cato ; as also the Senones , who captured Rome .
SOL The Padus descends from the bosom of Mount Vesulus , one of the most elevated points of the chain of the Alps , in the territories of the Ligurian Vagienni , and rises at its source in a manner that well merits an inspection by the curious ; after which it hides itself in a subterranean channel until it rises again in the country of the Forovibienses .
It is inferior in fame to none whatever among the rivers , being known to the Greeks as the Eridanus and famous as the scene of the punishment of Phaethon .
At the rising of the Dog-star it is swollen by the melted snows ; but , though it proves more furious in its course to the adjoining fields than to the vessels that are upon it , still it takes care to carry away no portion of its banks , and when it recedes , renders them additionally fertile .
Its length from its source is 300 miles , to which we must add eighty-eight for its sinuosities ; and it receives from the Apennines and Alps not only several navigable rivers , but immense lakes as well , which discharge themselves into its waters , thus conveying altogether as many as thirty streams into the Adriatic Sea .
SOL Of these the best known are the following — flowing from the range of the Apennines , the Jactus , the Tanarus , the Trebia which passes Placentia , the Tarus , the Incia , the Gabellus , the Scultenna , and the Rhenus : from the chain of the Alps , the Stura , the Orgus , the two Duriae , the Sessites , the Ticinus , the Lambrus , the Addua , the Ollius , and the Mincius .
There is no river known to receive a larger increase than this in so short a space ; so much so indeed that it is impelled onwards by this vast body of water , and , invading the land , forms deep channels in its course : hence it is that , although a portion of its stream is drawn off by rivers and canals between Ravenna and Altinum , for a space of 120 miles , still , at the spot where it discharges the vast body of its waters , it is said to form seven seas .
SOL By the Augustan Canal the Padus is carried to Ravenna , at which place it is called the Padusa , having formerly borne the name of Messanicus .
The nearest mouth to this spot forms the extensive port known as that of Vatrenus , where Claudius Caesar , on his triumph over the Britons , entered the Adriatic in a vessel that deserved rather the name of a vast palace than a ship .
This mouth , which was formerly called by some the Eridanian , has been by others styled the Spinetic mouth , from the city of Spina , a very powerful place which formerly stood in the vicinity , if we may form a conclusion from the amount of its treasure deposited at Delphi ; it was founded by Diomedes .
At this spot the river Vatrenus , which flows from the territory of Forum Corneli , swells the waters of the Padus .
SOL The next mouth to this is that of Caprasia , then that of Sagis , and then Volane , formerly called Olane ; all of which are situate upon the Flavian Canal , which the Tuscans formerly made from Sagis , thus drawing the impetuous stream of the river across into the marshes of the Atriani , which they call the Seven Seas ; and upon which is the noble port of Atria , a city of the Tuscans , from which place the sea was formerly called the Atriatic , though now the Adriatic .
SOL We next come to the overflowing mouths of Carbonaria , and the Fosses of Philistina , by some called Tartarus , all of which originate in the overflow of the waters in the Philistinian Canal , swollen by the streams of the Atesis , descending from the Tridentine Alps , and of the Togisonus , flowing from the territory of the Patavini .
A portion of them also forms the adjoining port of Brundulum , in the same manner as Edron is formed by the two rivers Meduacus and the Clodian Canal .
With the waters of these streams the Padus unites , and with them discharges itself into the sea , forming , according to most writers , between the Alps and the sea-shore a triangular figure , 2000 stadia in circumference , not unlike the Delta formed by the Nile in Egypt .
I feel somewhat ashamed to have to borrow from the Greeks any statement in reference to Italy ; Metrodorus of Scepsis , however , informs us that this river has obtained its name of Padus from the fact , that about its source there are great numbers of pine-trees , which in the Gallic language are called " padi .
" In the tongue of the Ligurians this river is called " Bodincus ," which signifies " the bottomless .
" This derivation is in some measure supported by the fact that near this river there is the town of Industria , of which the ancient name was Bodincomagum , and where the river begins to be of greater depth than in other parts .
SOL THE ELEVENTH REGION OF ITALY ; ITALIA TRANSPAIDANA .
From the river Padus the eleventh region receives its name of Transpadana ; to which , situate as it is wholly in the interior , the river , by its bounteous channel , conveys the gifts of all the seas .
The towns are Vibi Forum and Segusio ; and , at the foot of the Alps , the colony of Augusta Taurinorum , at which place the Padus becomes navigable , and which was founded by the ancient race of the Ligurians , and of Augusta Praetoria of the Salassi , near the two passes of the Alps , the Grecian and the Penine ( by the latter it is said that the Carthaginians passed into Italy , by the Grecian , Hercules ) — the town of Eporedia , the foundation of which by the Roman people was enjoined by the Sibylline books ; the Gauls call tamers of horses by the name of " Eporediae " — Vercellae , the town of the Libici , derived its origin from the Salluvii , and Novaria , founded by the Vertacomacori , is at the present day a district of the Vocontii , and not , as Cato supposes , of the Ligurians ; of whom two nations , called the Laevi and the Marici , founded Ticinum , not far from the Padus , as the Boii , descended from the Transalpine nations , have founded Laus Pompeia and the Insubres Mediolanum .
SOL From Cato we also learn that Comum , Bergomum , and Licini forum , and some other peoples in the vicinity , originated with the Orobii , but he admits that he is ignorant as to the origin of that nation .
Cornelius Alexander however informs us that they came from Greece , interpreting their name as meaning " those who live upon the mountains .
" In this district , Parra has disappeared , a town of the Orobii , from whom , according to Cato , the people of Bergomum are descended ; its site even yet shows that it was situate in a position more elevated than fruitful .
The Caturiges have also perished , an exiled race of the Insubres , as also Spina previously mentioned ; Melpum too , a place distinguished for its opulence , which , as we are informed by Cornelius Nepos , was destroyed by the Insubres , the Boii , and the Senones , on the very day on which Camillus took Veii .
SOL THE TENTH REGION OF ITALY : We now come to the tenth region of Italy , situate on the Adriatic Sea .
In this district are Venetia , the river Silis , rising in the Tarvisanian mountains , the town of Altinum , the river Liquentia rising in the mountains of Opitergium , and a port with the same name , the colony of Concordia ; the rivers and harbours of Romatinum , the greater and less Tiliaventum , the Anaxum , into which the Varamus flows , the Alsa , and the Natiso with the Turrus , which flow past the colony of Aquileia at a distance of fifteen miles from the sea .
This is the country of the Carni , and adjoining to it is that of the Iapydes , the river Timavus , the fortress of Pucinum , famous for its wines , the Gulf of Tergeste , and the colony of that name , thirty-three miles from Aquileia .
Six miles beyond this place lies the river Formio , 189 miles distant from Ravenna , the ancient boundary of enlarged Italy , and now the frontier of Istria .
That this region takes its name from the river Ister which flows from the Danube , also called the Ister , into the Adriatic opposite the mouth of the Padus , and that the sea which lies between them is rendered fresh by their waters running from opposite directions , has been erroneously asserted by many , and among them by Nepos even , who dwelt upon the banks of the Padus .
For it is the fact that no river which runs from the Danube discharges itself into the Adriatic .
They have been misled , I think , by the circumstance that the ship Argo came down some river into the Adriatic sea , not far from Tergeste ; but what river that was is now unknown .
The most careful writers say that the ship was carried across the Alps on men 's shoulders , having passed along the Ister , then along the Savus , and so from Nauportus , which place , lying between Aemona and the Alps , from that circumstance derives its name .
SOL ISTRIA , ITS PEOPLE AND LOCALITY : Istria projects in the form of a peninsula .
Some writers have stated its length to be forty miles , and its circumference 125 ; and the same as to Liburnia which adjoins it , and the Flanatic Gulf , while others make it 225 ; others again make the circumference of Liburnia 180 miles .
Some persons too extend Iapydia , at the back of Istria , as far as the Flanatic Gulf , a distance of 130 miles , thus making Liburnia but 150 miles .
Tuditanus , who subdued the Istri , had this inscription on his statue which was erected there : " From Aquileia to the river Titus is a distance of 1000 stadia .
" SOL The towns of Istria with the rights of Roman citizens are Aegida , Parentium , and the colony of Pola , now Pietas Julia , formerly founded by the Colchians , and distant from Tergeste 100 miles : after which we come to the town of Nesactium , and the river Arsia , now the boundary of Italy .
The distance across from Ancona to Pola is 120 miles .
In the interior of the tenth region are the colonies of Cremona , Brixia in the territory of the Cenomanni , Ateste belonging to the Veneti , and the towns of Acelum , Patavium , Opitergium , Belunum , and Vicetia ; with Mantua , the only city of the Tuscans now left beyond the Padus .
Cato informs us that the Veneti are descendants of the Trojans , and that the Cenomanni dwelt among the Volcae in the vicinity of Massilia .
There are also the towns of the Fertini , the Tridentini , and the Beruenses , belonging to the Rhaeti , Verona , belonging to the Rhaeti and the Euganei , and Julienses to the Carni .
We then have the following peoples , whom there is no necessity to particularize with any degree of exactness , the Alutrenses , the Asseriates , the Flamonienses with those surnamed Vanienses , and the others called Culici , the Forojulienses surnamed Transpadani , the Foretani , the Nedinates , the Quarqueni , the Taurisani , the Togienses , and the Varvari .
In this district there have disappeared — upon the coast — Iramene , Pellaon , and Palsatium , Atina and Caelina belonging to the Veneti , Segeste and Ocra to the Carni , and Noreia to the Taurisci .
L. Piso also informs us that although the senate disapproved of his so doing , M. Claudius Marcellus razed to the ground a tower situated at the twelfth mile-stone from Aquileia .
SOL In this region also and the eleventh there are some celebrated lakes , and several rivers that either take their rise in them or else are fed by their waters , in those cases in which they again emerge from them .
These are the Addua , fed by the Lake Larius , the Ticinus by Lake Verbannus , the Mincius by Lake Benacus , the Ollius by Lake Sebinnus , and the Lambrus by Lake Eupilis — all of them flowing into the Padus .
SOL Caelius states that the length of the Alps from the Upper Sea to the Lower is 1000 miles , a distance which Timagenes shortens by twenty-two .
Cornelius Nepos assigns to them a breadth of 100 miles , and T. Livius of 3000 stadia ; but then in different places .
For in some localities they exceed 100 miles ; where they divide Germany , for instance , from Italy ; while in other parts they do not reach seventy , being thus narrowed by the providential dispensation of nature as it were .
The breadth of Italy , taken from the river Var at the foot of these mountains , and passing along by the Vada Sabatia , the Taurini , Comum , Brixia , Verona , Vicetia , Opitergium , Aquileia , Tergeste , Pola , and Arsia , is 745 miles .
SOL THE ALPS , AND THE ALPINE NATIONS : Many nations dwell among the Alps ; but the more remarkable , between Pola and the district of Tergeste , are the Secusses , the Subocrini , the Catali , the Menocaleni , and near the Carni the people formerly called the Taurisci , but now the Norici .
Adjoining to these are the Rhaeti and the Vindelici , who are all divided into a multitude of states .
It is supposed that the Rhaeti are the descendants of the Tuscans , who were expelled by the Gauls and migrated hither under the command of their chief , whose name was Rhaetus .
Turning then to the side of the Alps which fronts Italy , we have the Euganean nations enjoying Latin rights , and of whom Cato enumerates thirty-four towns .
Among these are the Triumpilini , a people who were sold with their territory ; and then the Camuni , and several similar tribes , each of them in the jurisdiction of its neighbouring municipal town .
The same author also considers the Lepontii and the Salassi to be of Tauriscan origin , but most other writers , giving a Greek interpretation to their name , consider the Lepontii to have been those of the followers of Hercules who were left behind in consequence of their limbs being frozen by the snow of the Alps .
They are also of opinion that the inhabitants of the Grecian Alps are descended from a portion of the Greeks of his army , and that the Euganeans , being sprung from an origin so illustrious , thence took their name .
The head of these are the Stoeni .
The Vennonenses and the Sarunetes , peoples of the Rhaeti , dwell about the sources of the river Rhenus , while the tribe of the Lepontii , known as the Uberi , dwell in the vicinity of the sources of the Rhodanus , in the same district of the Alps .
There are also other native tribes here , who have received Latin rights , such as the Octodurenses , and their neighbours the Centrones , the Cottian states , the Ligurian Vagienni , descended from the Caturiges , as also those called Montani ; besides numerous nations of the Capillati , on the confines of the Ligurian Sea .
SOL It may not be inappropriate in this place to subjoin the inscription now to be seen upon the trophy erected on the Alps , which is to the following effect : — " To the Emperor Caesar — The son of Caesar now deified , Augustus , Pontifex Maximus , and emperor fourteen years , in the seventeenth year of his holding the tribunitial authority , the Senate and the Roman people , in remembrance that under his command and auspices all the Alpine nations which extended from the upper sea to the lower were reduced to subjection by the Roman people — The Alpine nations so subdued were : the Triumpilini , the Camuni , the Venostes , the Vennonenses , the Isarci , the Breuni , the Genaunes , the Focunates , four nations of the Vindelici , the Consuanetes , the Rucinates , the Licates , the Catenates , the Ambisontes , the Rugusci , the Suanetes , the Calucones , the Brixentes , the Lepontii , the Uberi , the Nantuates , the Seduni , the Varagri , the Salassi , the Acitavones , the Medulli , the Uceni , the Caturiges , the Brigiani , the Sogiontii , the Brodiontii , the Nemaloni , the Edenates , the Esubiani , the Veamini , the Gallitae , the Triulatti , the Ecdini , the Vergunni , the Eguituri , the Nementuri , the Oratelli , the Nerusi , the Velauni , and the Suetri .
" SOL The twelve states of the Cottiani were not included in the list , as they had shown no hostility , nor yet those which had been placed by the Pompeian law under the jurisdiction of the municipal towns .
SOL Such then is Italy , sacred to the gods , such are the nations , such the cities of her peoples ; to which we may add , that this is that same Italy , which , when L .
Aemilius Paulus and C. Attilius Regulus were Consuls , on hearing of the rising in Gaul , unaided , and without any foreign assistance whatever , without the help even of that portion which lies beyond the Padus , armed 80,000 horse and 700,000 foot .
In abundance of metals of every kind .
Italy yields to no land whatever ; but all search for them has been prohibited by an ancient decree of the Senate , who gave orders thereby that Italy shall be exempted from such treatment .
SOL LIBURNIA AND ILLYRICUM : The nation of the Liburni adjoins the river Arsia , and extends as far as the river Titus .
The Mentores , the Hymani , the Encheleae , the Buni , and the people whom Callimachus calls the Peucetiae , formerly formed part of it ; but now the whole in general are comprised under the one name of Illyricum .
But few of the names of these nations are worthy of mention , or indeed very easy of pronunciation .
To the jurisdiction of Scardona resort the Iapydes and fourteen cities of the Liburni , of which it may not prove tedious if I mention the Lacinienses , the Stlupini , the Burnistae , and the Olbonenses .
Belonging to the same jurisdiction there are , in the enjoyment of Italian rights , the Alutae , the Flanates , from whom the Gulf takes its name , the Lopsi , and the Varvarini ; the Assesiates , who are exempt from tribute ; and upon the islands , the Fertinates and the Curiattae .
SOL Besides these , there are on the coast , after leaving Nesactium , Alvona , Flanona , Tarsatica , Senia , Lopsica , Ortopula , Vegium , Argyruntum , Corinium , Aenona , the city of Pasinum , and the river Tedanius , at which Iapydia terminates .
The islands of this Gulf , with their towns , besides those above mentioned , are Absyrtium , Arba , Crexa , Gissa , and Portunata .
Again , on the mainland there is the colony of Iadera , distant from Pola 160 miles ; then , at a distance of thirty miles , the island of Colentum , and of eighteen , the mouth of the river Titus .
SOL DALMATIA : Scardona , situate upon the river , at a distance of twelve miles from the sea , forms the boundary of Liburnia and the beginning of Dalmatia .
Next to this place comes the ancient country of the Autariatares and the fortress of Tariona , the Promontory of Diomedes , or , as others call it , the peninsula of Hyllis , 100 miles in circuit .
Then comes Tragurium , a place with the rights of Roman citizens , and celebrated for its marble , Sicum , a place to which Claudius , the emperor lately deified , sent a colony of his veterans , and Salona , a colony , situate 112 miles from Iadera .
To this place resort for legal purposes , having the laws dispensed according to their divisions into decuries or tithings , the Dalmatae , forming 342 decuries , the Deurici 22 , the Ditiones 239 , the Mazaei 269 , and the Sardiates 52 .
In this region are Burnum , Andetrium , and Tribulium , fortresses ennobled by the battles of the Roman people .
To the same jurisdiction also belong the Issaei , the Colentini , the Separi , and the Epetini , nations inhabiting the islands .
After these come the fortresses of Peguntium and of Rataneum , with the colony of Narona , the seat of the third jurisdiction , distant from Salona eighty-two miles , and situate upon a river of the same name , at a distance of twenty miles from the sea .
M. Varro states that eighty-nine states used to resort thither , but now nearly the only ones that are known are the Cerauni with 24 decuries , the Daorizi with 17 , the Daesitiates with 103 , the Docleatae with 33 , the Deretini with 14 , the Deremistae with 30 , the Dindari with 33 , the Glinditiones with 44 , the Melcomani with 24 , the Naresii with 102 , the Scirtarii with 72 , the Siculotae with 24 , and the Vardaei , once the scourges of Italy , with no more than 20 decuries .
In addition to these , this district was possessed by the Ozuaei , the Partheni , the Hemasini , the Arthitae , and the Armistae .
The colony of Epidaurum is distant from the river Naron 100 miles .
After Epidaurum come the following towns , with the rights of Roman citizens : — Rhizinium , Acruvium , Butua , Olcinium , formerly called Colchinium , having been founded by the Colchians ; the river Drilo , and , upon it , Scodra , a town with the rights of Roman citizens , situate at a distance of eighteen miles from the sea ; besides in former times many Greek towns and once powerful states , of which all remembrance is fast fading away .
For in this region there were formerly the Labeatae , the Enderini , the Sasaei , the Grabaei , properly called Illyrii , the Taulantii , and the Pyrei .
The Promontory of Nymphaion on the sea-coast still retains its name ; and there is Lissum , a town enjoying the rights of Roman citizens , at a distance from Epidamnum of 100 miles .
SOL At Lissum begins the province of Macedonia , the nations of the Parthini , and behind them the Dassaretae .
The mountains of Candavia are seventy-eight miles from Dyrrhachium .
On the coast lies Denda , a town with the rights of Roman citizens , the colony of Epidamnum , which , on account of its inauspicious name , was by the Romans called Dyrrhachium , the river Aous , by some called Aeas , and Apollonia , formerly a colony of the Corinthians , at a distance of four miles from the sea , in the vicinity of which the celebrated Nymphaion is inhabited by the barbarous Amantes and Buliones .
Upon the coast too is the town of Oricum , founded by the Colchians .
At this spot begins Epirus , with the Acroceraunian mountains , by which we have previously mentioned this Gulf of Europe as bounded .
Oricum is distant from the Sallentine Promontory in Italy eighty miles .
SOL THE NORICI : In the rear of the Carni and the Iapydes , along the course of the great river Ister , the Rhaeti touch upon the Norici : their towns are Virunum , Celeia , Teurnia , Aguntum , Vianiomina , Claudia , and Flavium Solvense .
Adjoining to the Norici is Lake Peiso , and the deserts of the Boii ; they are however now inhabited by the people of Sabaria , a colony of the now deified emperor Claudius , and the town of Scarabantia Julia .
SOL PANNONIA : Next to them comes acorn-bearing Pannonia , along which the chain of the Alps , gradually lessening as it runs through the middle of Illyricum from north to south , forms a gentle slope on the right hand and the left .
The portion which looks towards the Adriatic Sea is called Dalmatia and Illyricum , above mentioned , while Pannonia stretches away towards the north , and has the Danube for its extreme boundary .
In it are the colonies of Aemona and Siscia .
The following rivers , both known to fame and adapted for commerce , flow into the Danube ; the Draus , which rushes from Noricum with great impetuosity , and the Savus , which flows with a more gentle current from the Carnic Alps , there being a space between them of 120 miles .
The Draus runs through the Serretes , the Serrapilli , the Iasi , and the Andizetes ; the Savus through the Colapiani and the Breuci ; these are the principal peoples .
Besides them there are the Arivates , the Azali , the Amantini , the Belgites , the Catari , the Cornacates , the Eravisci , the Hercuniates , the Latovici , the Oseriates , the Varciani , and , in front of Mount Claudius , the Scordisci , behind it the Taurisci .
In the Savus there is the island of Metubarris , the greatest of all the islands formed by rivers .
Besides the above , there are these other rivers worthy of mention : — the Colapis , which flows into the Savus near Siscia , where , dividing its channel , it forms the island which is called Segestica a ; and the river Bacuntius , which flows into the Savus at the town of Sirmium , where we find the state of the Sirmienses and the Amantini .
Forty-five miles thence is Taurunum , where the Savus flows into the Danube ; above which spot the Valdanus and the Urpanus , themselves far from ignoble rivers , join that stream .
SOL MOESIA : Joining up to Pannonia is the province called Moesia , which runs , with the course of the Danube , as far as the Euxine .
It commences at the confluence previously mentioned .
In it are the Dardani , the Celegeri , the Triballi , the Timachi , the Moesi , the Thracians , and the Scythians who border on the Euxine .
The more famous among its rivers are the Margis , which rises in the territory of the Dardani , the Pingus , the Timachus , the Oescus which rises in Mount Rhodope , and , rising in Mount Haemus , the Utus , the Asamus , and the Ieterus .
SOL The breadth of Illyricum at its widest part is 325 miles , and its length from the river Arsia to the river Drinius 530 ; from the Drinius to the Promontory of Acroceraunia Agrippa states to be 175 miles , and he says that the entire circuit of the Italian and Illyrian Gulf is 1700 miles .
In this Gulf , according to the limits which we have drawn , are two seas , the Ionian in the first part , and the Adriatic , which runs more inland and is called the Upper Sea .
SOL ISLANDS OF THE IONIAN SEA AND THE ADRIATIC : In the Ausonian Sea there are no islands worthy of notice beyond those which we have already mentioned , and only a few in the Ionian ; those , for instance , upon the Calabrian coast , opposite Brundusium , by the projection of which a harbour is formed ; and , over against the Apulian coast , Diomedia , remarkable for the monument of Diomedes , and another island called by the same name , but by some Teutria .
SOL The coast of Illyricum is clustered with more than 1000 islands , the sea being of a shoaly nature , and numerous creeks and aestuaries running with their narrow channels between portions of the land .
The more famous are those before the mouths of the Timavus , with warm springs that rise with the tides of the sea , the island of Cissa near the territory of the Istri , and the Pullaria and Absyrtides , so called by the Greeks from the circumstance of Absyrtus , the brother of Medea , having been slain there .
Some islands near them have been called the Electrides , upon which amber , which they call " electrum ," was said to be found ; a most assured instance however of that untruthfulness which is generally ascribed to the Greeks , seeing that it has never yet been ascertained which of the islands were meant by them under that name .
Opposite to the Iader is Lissa , and other islands whose names have been already mentioned .
Opposite to the Liburni are some islands called the Crateae , and no smaller number styled Liburniecae and Celadussae .
Opposite to Surium is Bavo , and Brattia , famous for its goats , Issa with the rights of Roman citizens , and Pharia with a town .
At a distance of twenty-five miles from Issa is Corcyra Melaena , with a town founded by the Cnidians ; between which and Illyricum is Melite , from which , as we learn from Callimachus , a certain kind of little dogs were called Melitaei ; fifteen miles from it we find the seven Elaphites .
In the Ionian Sea , at a distance of twelve miles from Oricum , is Sasonis , notorious from having been a harbour of pirates .
SOL
