THE mere treatment of this subject undoubtedly increases the admiration that I at least feel for the men of old ; the greater the number of plants waiting to be described , the more one is led to revere the careful research of the ancients and their kindness in passing on the results .
Without a doubt even the bounteousness of Nature herself might seem to have been surpassed by them in this way if the discoveries had been the result of human endeavour .
But as it is , it is clear that this bounteousness has been the work of the gods , or at least due to their inspiration , even when the actual discoverer was a man , and that the same Mother of all things both produced the herbs and made them known to us .
This is the greatest miracle of life , if we care to admit the truth .
To think that the Scythian plant , for example , is brought from the marshes of Maeotis , euphorbea from Mount Atlas and from beyond the pillars of Hercules , where the works of Nature actually begin to fail ; on another side britannica , from islands in the ocean lying beyond the mainland , aethiopis too from the clime scorched by the constellations of heaven , and other plants moreover passing hither and thither from all quarters throughout the whole world for the welfare of mankind , all owing to the boundless grandeur of the Roman Peace , which displays in turn not men only with their different lands and tribes , but also mountains , and peaks soaring into the clouds , their offspring and also their plants .
May this gift of the gods last , I pray , for ever !
So truly do they seem to have given to the human race the Romans as it were a second Sun .
SOL But who could revere enough the diligent research of the ancients ?
It is established that of all poisons the quickest to act is aconite , and that death occurs on the same day if the genitals of a female creature are but touched by it .
This was the poison that Marcus Caelius accused Calpurnius Bestia of using to kill his wives in their sleep .
Hence the damning peroration of the prosecutor 's speech accusing the defendant 's finger .
Fable has it that aconite sprang out of the foam of the dog Cerberus when Hercules dragged him from the underworld , and that this is why it grows around Heraclea in Pontus , where is pointed out the entrance to the underworld used by Hercules .
Yet even aconite the ancients have turned to the benefit of human health , by finding out by experience that administered in warm wine it neutralizes the stings of scorpions .
It is its nature to kill a human being unless in that being it finds something else to destroy .
Against this alone it struggles , regarding it as more pressing than the find .
[ This is the only fight , when the aconite discovers a poison in the viscera .
] What a marvel !
Although by themselves both are deadly , yet the two poisons in a human being perish together so that the human survives .
Moreover even remedies used by wild beasts have been handed down by the ancients , who have shown how venomous a creatures also by themselves obtain healing .
Scorpions , touched by aconite , become numbed , and are pale and stupefied , acknowledging their defeat .
They find a help in white hellebore , its touch dispelling the torpor ; the aconite yields to two evil foes , one peculiar to itself and one common to all creatures .
If anyone believes that these discoveries could , by any chance , have been made by a man , he shows himself ungrateful for the gods' gifts .
They touch flesh with aconite , and kill panthers by a mere taste of it , otherwise panthers would overrun the regions where they are found .
For this reason some have called aconite pardalianehes , that is panther-strangler .
But it has been proved that panthers are at once saved from this death by tasting human excrement ; surely nobody doubts that this remedy has been found by Chance , and that on every occasion it is even today a new find , since wild animals have neither reason nor experience for results to be passed from one to another .
This Chance therefore , this is that great deity who has made most of the discoveries that enrich our life , this is the name of him by whom is meant she who is at once the Mother and the Mistress of all creation .
Either guess is equally likely , whether we judge that wild animals make these discoveries every day or that they possess a never-failing instinct .
Again it is shameful that all animals except man know what is health-giving for themselves .
Our ancestors however advertised the view that aconite is also a very health-giving ingredient of preparations for the eyes , openly declaring their belief that no evil a at all is without some admixture of good .
It will therefore be right for me , who have described no poisons , to point out the nature of aconite , if only for the purpose of detecting it .
It has leaves like those of cyclamen or of cucumber , not more than four , rising from the root and slightly hairy , and a root of moderate size , like a crayfish ( cammarus ) , whence some have called it cammaran , and others thelyphonon , for the reason I have given already .
The end of the root curves up a little like a scorpion 's tail , whence some have called it also scorpion .
There have been some who would prefer to call it myoctonos since at a distance , even a long distance , its smell kills rats and mice .
The plant grows on bare crags which are called aconae , and for that reason some have given it the name of aconite , there being nothing near , not even dust , to give it nourishment .
This then is the reason for its name given by some ; others have thought it was so named because it had the same power to cause rapid death as whetstones had to give an edge to an iron blade ; no sooner was the stone applied than its rapid action was noticeable .
SOL Aethiopis has leaves like those of phlomos , large , numerous and hairy , growing from the root .
The stem is quadrangular , rough , like that of arction and hollowed by many axils .
The seed is like that of vetch , white and geminate ; the roots are numerous , long , fleshy , soft , and gluey to the taste .
When dry these become black and hard , so that they might be taken for horns .
This plant grows not only in Aethiopia , but also on Mount Ida in the Troad and in Messenia .
The roots are gathered in autumn and dried in the sun for some days to prevent their growing mouldy .
Taken in white wine they are a remedy for uterine troubles , and a decoction is given by the mouth for sciatica , pleurisy and rough throats .
The Aethiopian kind , however , gives the greatest , and immediate , relief .
SOL Ageraton resembles fennel-giant , is two spans high and like origanum , and the flowers are golden knobs .
The fumes when the plant is burnt are diuretic and purge the uterus : used in a sits bath the plant does this more effectively .
The reason for the name is [ not this but ] because it lasts for a long time without fading .
SOL The aloe bears a resemblance to the squill , but it is larger , and has more fleshy leaves , and with slanting streaks .
Its stem is tender , red in the centre , and not unlike anthericus ; the root is single , as it were a stake sunk into the ground .
It has an oppressive smell , and a bitter taste .
The most valued kind is imported from India , but it also grows in the province of Asia .
This kind is used only for wounds , the freshly gathered leaves , or the juice , having a wonderful power of uniting .
For this reason it is planted in conical jars , as is the greater aizoum .
Some , before the seed ripens , make an incision in the stem to get the juice ; some do so in the leaves as well .
Drops too form spontaneously on it , and adhere .
Some therefore recommend that the ground where the aloe has been planted should be beaten down hard , so as to prevent absorption .
Some have reported that in Judea beyond Jerusalem can be found mineral aloes .
This however is the most inferior kind of all , and no other is darker or more moist .
So the best aloes will he fatty and shiny , of a ruddy colour , friable , compact like liver , and easily melted .
The kind to be rejected is dark and hard , gritty , and adulterated with gum and acacia , the adulteration being easily detected by the taste .
The nature of an aloe is bracing , astringent !
and gently warming .
There are many uses for it , but the chief is to relax the bowels , for it is almost the only laxative that is also a stomach tonic , no ill effects whatever resulting from its use .
A drachma is taken in drink , but for fluxes of the stomach a spoonful in two cyathi of warm or cold water is taken twice or three times a day at intervals , as circumstances require ; but for purging the bowels the maximum dose is three drachmae , which is more effective if food is taken after the draught .
With a dry wine it prevents the hair from falling out , the head being thoroughly rubbed in the contrary way to the hair .
It relieves headache if it is applied in vinegar and rose oil to the temples and forehead , or a dilute solution may be poured over them .
All eye troubles , it is agreed , are cured by the aloe , but it is specific for itch and scaliness of the eyelids ; it is also good , applied with honey , especially with Pontic honey , for marks and bruises ; for diseased tonsils or gums , for all sores in the mouth , and for spitting of blood , the dose is a drachma , taken in water if the spitting is not excessive , and in vinegar if it is .
Haemorrhage due to wounds also , or to any other cause , it arrests if used by itself or in vinegar .
In other ways too it is very useful for wounds , as it promotes cicatrisation .
It is also sprinkled on ulcerated male genitals , condylomata and chaps of the anus , sometimes in wine , in raisin wine , or else dry by itself , according as the treatment may need mild measures or coercive .
It also gently arrests excessive bleeding from haemorrhoids .
For dysentery it is injected , and for indigestion it is taken in drink shortly after the evening meal .
For jaundice the dose is three oboli in water ; for internal purgings pills also are swallowed made up with boiled honey or turpentine resin .
It removes hangnails ; for eye preparations it is washed , to let the most gritty parts settle , or else it is roasted in an earthen vessel and occasionally stirred with a feather so that the roasting may be even throughout .
SOL Alcea has leaves like those of the vervain called aristereon , three or four stems covered with leaves , flowers like a rose , and white roots , six at most , a cubit long , and slanting .
It grows in a soil which is rich but not dry .
The root is used in wine or water for dysentery , diarrhoea , ruptures and sprains .
SOL Alypon is a small sprout with a soft head , and not unlike beet , sharp to the taste and viscous , very pungent and burning .
In hydromel with a little salt added it loosens the bowels .
The smallest dose is two drachmae , a moderate one four , the maximum being six .
When given as a purge it is taken in chicken broth .
SOL Alsine , which some call myosoton , is found in groves ; hence its name .
It begins to grow just after midwinter , and withers at midsummer .
When it puts forth its leaves , they are like the ears of little mice .
However , I shall describe another plant , to which more properly would be given the name myosotis .
Alsine would be just the same as helxine , were it not that it is smaller and less hairy .
It grows in gardens and especially on walls .
When being bruised it smells like cucumber .
It is used for gatherings and inflammations , and for all purposes for which helxine is employed , but with less efficacy .
Especially is it applied to eye fluxes , and with barley meal to sore genitals and ulcers .
Its juice is poured into the ears .
SOL Androsaces is a whitish plant , bitter , leafless , with seed pods in hairy tufts .
It grows especially along the sea coast of Syria .
For dropsy are prescribed two-drachma doses of the plant pounded or boiled down in water , vinegar , or wine , for it is a powerful diuretic .
It is also prescribed for dropsy and applied locally .
The seed too has the same properties .
SOL Androsaemon , or , as others have called it , ascyron , is not unlike hypericum , about which I have already spoken , but the stalks are larger , closer together , and redder .
Its leaves are pale and shaped like those of rue ; the seed resembles that of the dark poppy .
The stalk tops when crushed give out a juice of the colour of blood .
Their smell is resinous .
It grows in vineyards ; about the middle of autumn it is dug and hung up .
When used as a purge it is pounded with the seed and taken early in the morning or after dinner , the dose being two drachmae in hydromel , wine , or plain water , and the whole draught a sextarius .
It brings away bile , and is excellent for sciatica , but on the following day should be swallowed a drachma of caper root well mixed with resin .
This dose should be repeated after an interval of four days .
After the actual purging wine should be drunk by the stronger patients and water by the weaker .
The plant is applied also to gouty limbs , to burns , and , as it stanches blood , to wounds .
SOL Ambrosia , an indeterminate name loosely given to other plants , is the primary name of one in particular , which is branchy and close set , slender about three spans high , with a root one span less , and with leaves around the bottom of the stem resembling those of rue .
The seed is on the twigs , hanging dawn in clusters , and has a vinous smell ; and so the plant is called botrys by some , although others call it artemisia .
The Cappadocians use it for chaplets .
In medicine it is used as a discutient .
SOL Anonis , which some prefer to call ononis , is branchy , and like fenugreek , except that it is more bushy and more hairy .
It has an agreeable smell , and becomes prickly after spring .
Preserved in brine it is also used as food , while the fresh plant cauterizes the edges of ulcers .
The root is boiled down in vinegar and water for toothache , and taken in drink with honey it also expels stone from the bladder .
For epilepsy it is given in oxymel boiled down to one half .
SOL Anagyros , which some call acopon , is bushy , with a strong smell and a flower like that of cabbage .
The seed grows in little horn-like pods of some length ; it is kidney-shaped and becomes hard during the harvests .
The leaves are placed on gatherings , and tied as an amulet on women in difficult labour , care being taken to remove them immediately after delivery .
But if a dead foetus does not come away , or if the afterbirth or menstruation is retarded , the leaves are taken in raisin-wine , a dose being a drachma .
Similar doses are given for asthma , and in old wine the leaves are given for the bites of poisonous spiders .
The root is employed to disperse or mature boils ; the seed chewed acts as an emetic .
SOL Anonymus has found a name by not finding one .
It is imported from Scythia .
Hicesius , a physician of no small authority , spread its fame , as did Aristogiton ; it is excellent for wounds if applied pounded in water ; taken however in drink it is equally good for blows on the breasts or on the hypochondia , likewise for spitting of blood .
Some authorities have held that wounded patients should take it in drink .
The further statement I think fabulous , that if burnt fresh it acts as solder for iron or copper .
SOL Aparine , called by some omphalocarpos , by others philanthropos , is branchy , hairy , and with five or six leaves arranged at intervals in a circle around the branches .
The seed is round , hard , hollowed , and rather sweet .
It grows in cornfields , or gardens , or meadows , and is so prickly as even to cling to the clothes .
The seed , taken in drachma doses in wine , is efficacious against the bite of serpents and poisonous spiders .
The leaves , applied locally , check excessive bleeding from wounds .
The juice is poured into the ears .
SOL Arction , which some prefer to call arcturns , has leaves like those of verbascum , except that they are more hairy .
The stem is long and soft , and the seed like that of cummin .
It grows on rocky soils , and has a tender root , whitish and sweet .
A decoction of it in wine is given for toothache , but it must be retained in the mouth .
The decoction is drunk for sciatica and strangury .
In wine the root is applied to burns and chilblains , which are also fomented with the seed pounded in wine with the root .
SOL Asplenon , called by some hemionion , has many leaves four inches long , a slimy root , pitted as is a fern 's , whitish and hairy .
There is no stem , flower or seed .
It grows on rocks and on shaded , damp walls , the most approved kind in Crete .
A decoction of its leaves in vinegar , taken as a draught for thirty days , is said to reduce the spleen , the leaves being also applied locally .
They relieve too hiccoughs .
This plant , as it causes barrenness , must not be given to women .
SOL Asclepias has leaves like those of ivy , bug branches , numerous roots that are slender and scented , stinking flowers , and a hatchet-shaped seed .
It grows on hills .
The roots cure colic and are used for snakebite ; they are not only taken in drink but also applied locally .
SOL Aster is called by some bubonion , because it is a sovereign remedy for affections of the groin .
Its stem has two or three oblong leaves , and on the top are little heads with rays like stars .
In drink it is also taken for snake bites .
But as medicine for the groin it is enjoined to be plucked with the left hand , and to be tied as an amulet next the girdle .
As an amulet it is also good for sciatica .
SOL Ascyron and ascyroides are like one another and also like hypericon , but what is called ascyroides has larger branches , which are like fennel-giant , red and with small yellow heads .
The seed , in little cups , is very small , black , and resinous .
The hairy tufts when crushed cause stains like blood , and therefore some have called the plant androsaemon .
Two-drachmae doses of the seed , taken in a sextarius of hydromel , are used for sciatica .
It loosens the bowels , brings away bile , and is applied to burns .
SOL Aphaca has very slender and tiny leaves .
Taller than the lentil it also bears larger pods , in which are three or four seeds , darker and smaller than those of the lentil .
It grows in cultivated fields , and has bracing qualities more powerful than those of the lentil , its other uses being the same .
A decoction of the seed checks fluxes of the stomach and bowels .
SOL In my authorities I have found no description of alcibium , but only that its pounded root and leaves are applied locally , and taken in drink , for snake bite ; a handful of the pounded leaves with three cyathi of neat wine , or three drachmae by weight of the root with the same measure of wine .
SOL Alectoros lophos , which we Romans call , ' comb ' ( crista ) , has several leaves like a cock 's comb , a slender stem , and black seed in pods .
Boiled with ground beans it is useful for cough , and with the addition of honey for film on the eyes .
The seed is cast whole into the eye ; it does no harm but attracts the film to itself .
Changing colour it begins to turn from black to white , swells , and works out by itself .
SOL We Romans call alum what the Greeks call symphyton petraion .
It is like ox cunila , with small leaves and three or four branches growing from the root , which have tips like those of thyme ; a ligneous plant , scented , sweet to the taste , promoting saliva , and with a long , red root .
It grows on rocks ( hence its surname petraion , ' rocky ') , and is very useful for affections of the sides and kidneys , for colic , chest , lungs , spitting of blood , and sore throat .
The root is pounded and taken in drink or boiled down in wine ; sometimes too this is used as embrocation .
Moreover , chewed it allays thirst , and is especially cooling to the lungs .
It is also applied to dislocations and bruises , and it soothes the intestines .
Cooked in hot ashes , pounded , after removal of the pods , with nine peppercorns and taken in water , it is binding to the bowels .
So excellent is it for healing wounds that , added even to pieces of meat that are being boiled , it binds them together .
Hence its Greek name symphyton .
It is also good for broken bones .
SOL Red seaweed for scorpion stings .
SOL Actaea has leaves with an offensive smell , rough and jointed stems , black seed like that of ivy , and soft berries .
It grows on shaded , rough , watery wound .
In doses of a full acetabulum it is given for internal diseases of women .
SOL Ampelos agria is a name given to a plant with hard leaves of an ashy colour , as I have described in my account of cultivated trees .
It has long , hard-skinned twigs , of a red colour like the blossom we call flame of Jupiter .
It bears in little clusters seed like pomegranate pips .
Its root , boiled down in three cyathi of water with the addition of two cyathi of Coan wine , is a gentle aperient , and therefore is given to dropsical patients .
The clusters remove the spots on women 's faces .
Sciatica too is relieved by this plant ground up with the leaves and applied with its own juice .
SOL There are several kinds of wormwood .
The Santonic comes from the state of the Santoni in Gaul , the Pontic from Pontus , where cattle fatten on it , and so are found to be without gall ; there is no finer wormwood than this , the Italian being far more bitter , but the pith of Pontic wormwood is sweet .
About its use there is general agreement , for it is a plant very easily found , and one of the most useful , being moreover especially honoured at the religious rites of the Roman people , seeing that at the Latin festival there is a race for four-horse chariots on the Capitoline Hill , the winner of which takes a draught of wormwood , our ancestors thinking , I believe , that health was a very grand prize to give .
It strengthens the stomach and for this reason it is used , as I have said , to give a flavour to wines .
A decoction in water , which is afterwards cooled in the open for a day and a night , is also taken ; six drachmae of the leaves with their branches are boiled down in three sextarii of rain water ; salt too should be added .
When very old it can still be used .
There is also administered an infusion of wormwood in water ; for this preparation should be styled ' infusion ,' and an essential of the infusion is that , whatever quantity of water is used , for three days the preparation should be wholly enclosed .
Pounded wormwood is rarely employed ; rarely too the extracted juice .
It is extracted , however , as soon as the seed begins to swell , the plant being soaked in water for three days when fresh and for seven when dried ; it is then boiled down to one third in a bronze vessel , ten heminae to forty-five sextarii of water ; and after being strained to remove the solid pieces it is boiled down again to the thickness of honey , just like juice obtained from the lesser centaury .
But this juice is injurious to the stomach and head , while the decoction I mentioned is very wholesome .
For it is astringent to the stomach , and with sil , Gallic nard and a little vinegar , brings away bile , promotes urine , soothes the bowels , curing them when in pain , drives out worms from the belly , and removes nausea and flatulence .
With rue , pepper and salt , it takes away the distaste for food , and aids digestion , bringing away undigested food .
As a purge , the old custom was to give six drachmae of the seed , three of salt , and a cyathus of honey , in a sextarius of sea water kept for a time , the purge being more efficacious if the amount of salt is doubled .
The pounding however must be carefully done , as it is a difficult task .
Some have also given the aforesaid weight in pearl barley with the addition of pennyroyal ; some the leaves in a dried fig to children , so that the bitter taste is not noticed .
Taken with iris it purges the thorax .
For jaundice it is taken raw in drink with celery or adiantum .
For flatulence it is slowly sipped hot in water ; for the liver it is taken with Gallic nard ; for the spleen , with vinegar , pottage or fig. In vinegar it is an antidote to poisonous fungi , as also to mistletoe ; in wine , to hemlock , the poison of the shrew mouse , sea weever and scorpions .
It is a great aid to clear vision .
With raisin wine it is applied to eye fluxes , and with honey to bruises .
Ear trouble is cured by fumigation with the steam of the decoction , or when bloody pus exudes , by pounded wormwood with honey .
Three or four twigs , with one root of Gallic nard and six cyathi of water , are diuretic and an emmenagogue ; it is specific for faulty menstruation if taken with honey or applied as a pessary in wool .
With honey and soda it is helpful for quinsy .
In water it cures night rashes .
Recent wounds it heals if applied before they have been touched with water ; it cures , moreover , sores on the head .
With Cyprian wax or with fig it makes an exceptionally good application for affections of the flanks .
It also cures pruritus , but must not be given to feverish patients .
Taken in drink on sea voyages it prevents nausea ; worn under a belly-band , swellings of the groin .
It induces sleep if inhaled through the nose or placed secretly under the sufferer 's head .
Put into clothes it keeps away moth .
Rubbing the body all over with it in oil drives away gnats , as does the smoke of it when burnt .
Writing ink mixed with the infusion protects the writing from mice .
Ashes of wormwood mixed with ointment and rose-oil stain the hair black .
SOL There is also a sea wormwood , called by some seriphum , the most approved growing at Taposiris in Egypt .
At the ceremonies of Isis the priests carry a branch of it ritually before them .
Narrower than the former , and less bitter , it is injurious to the stomach , but softens the bowels and expels intestinal worms .
It is taken in drink with oil and salt , or infused into gruel of three-month wheat .
A handful is boiled down in a sextarius of water to one-half .
SOL Ballote has a second name , black leek , given to it by the Greeks .
It is a bushy plant , with quadrangulate , dark stems , covered with hairy leaves , larger and darker than those of leek , and with an offensive smell .
It proves an effective antidote to dog-bites , the pounded leaves being laid with salt on the wound ; cooked also in hot ashes and wrapped in a cabbage leaf they are applied to condylomata .
With honey the plant also cleanses foul ulcers .
SOL Botrys is a bushy plant with yellow twigs .
Seed grows all round them , and the leaves are like those of chicory .
It is found on the banks of torrents , and is used as treatment for orthopnoea .
The Cappadocians call it ambrosia , others artemisia .
SOL Brabilla has an astringent property like the quince ; apart from this my authorities tell me nothing about it .
SOL Sea bryon is without doubt a plant ; it has leaves like those of lettuce , wrinkled , and as it were crumpled .
It has no stem , the leaves growing out of a single root .
It grows more especially upon rocks and on shells sunk in the ground .
Its special properties are to dry , astringency , and to reduce all gatherings and inflammations , in particular those of gout , and whenever there is need of cooling applications .
SOL The seed of bupleuron I find is given for snakebite , and that wounds are fomented with a decoction of this plant to which has been added leaves of mulberry or of origanum .
SOL Catanance , Thessalian plant , it would be a waste of time for me to describe , since it is used only for love-potions .
One thing it is quite pertinent to say in order to show up the fraud of sorcery : the plant was chosen for this purpose by soothsayers because as it withers it crumples up into the shape of the claws of a dead kite .
For the same reason I shall say nothing about cemos .
SOL There are two kinds of calyx .
One is like arum , and grows on ploughed land .
It is gathered before it withers , and has the same uses as aris .
Its root is also taken in drink as a powerful aperient and emmenagogue , while its stalks , boiled down with the leaves in pulse , cures tenesmus .
SOL The other kind of it is called by some anchusa , by others rhinoclia , having leaves like those of lettuce , but longer and downy , and a red root .
This applied with the finest pearl barley cures erysipelas , and , taken in white wine , liver complaints .
SOL Circaea is like cultivated trychnos , having a tiny , dark flower , small seed like that of millet forming in a sort of little horn , a six-inch root , generally triple or quadruple , whitish , scented , and with a hot taste .
It grows on sunny rocks .
An infusion of it in wine is taken for uterine pains and affections .
Three ounces of the pounded root should be steeped for a night and a day in three sextarii of wine .
The same draught also brings away the afterbirth .
The seed taken in wine or hydromel reduces the supply of milk .
SOL Cirsion is a tender , little sprout , two cubits high , triangular , and surrounded by prickly leaves , the prickles being soft .
The leaves are like those of bugloss , but smaller , and whitish .
At the tip are small , purple heads , which fall off as down .
It is said that this plant , or its root , used as an amulet , cures the pain of varicose veins .
SOL Crataegonon is like an ear of wheat , with many reed-like shoots , full of joints , springing from a single root .
It is found in shaded places .
The seed is like that of millet , with a very sharp taste .
If three oboli of it in three cyathi of water are taken in wine before supper by the woman , and also by the man , for forty days before conception takes place , the child they say will be of the male sex .
There is another crataegonos , which is called thelygonos ; it is distinguished from the other by its mild taste .
There are some who maintain that women who take the flower of crataegonos in drink conceive within forty days .
These plants with honey also heal chronic black ulcers , fill up the pits of ulcers , add flesh to atrophied parts , thoroughly cleanse purulent sores , disperse superficial abscesses , and soothe gout and every kind of gathering , in particular those on the breasts .
By crataegos or crataegon Theophrastus a would have us understand the tree which in Italy is called aquifolium .
SOL Crocodileon is like black chamaeleon in shape , with a long root uniformly thick , and a pungent smell .
It grows in sandy places .
Taken in drink it causes copious epistaxis of thick blood ; it is also said to reduce the spleen .
SOL Cynosorchis , called by some orchis , has leaves like olive leaves , soft , three in number and lying on the ground to the length of half a foot .
The root is bulbous , longish , and in two parts , the upper being harder and the lower softer .
Found generally in vineyards these are boiled and eaten as are bulbs .
If men eat the larger of these roots , male children are said to be conceived , but female if the smaller is eaten by women .
In Thessaly men take in goat 's milk the softer root as an aphrodisiac , but the harder as an antaphrodisiac .
The one part neutralizes the other .
SOL Chrysolachanum , growing in pine woods , is like lettuce .
If applied at once it heals cut sinews .
Elsewhere too is said to grow a kind of chrysolachanum with a golden flower and leaves like those of cabbage .
It is eaten boiled as a soft vegetable .
This plant , tied on as an amulet so that the patient can look at it , is said to cure jaundice .
I know that this account of chrysolachanum is inadequate , yet I find no more detail given , for a further fault of which our modern herbalists , at least , are guilty is that they have described but briefly , and even by a mere name , plants well known to themselves just as if these were generally familiar .
They say , for instance , that coagulum terrae ( earth rennet ) is constipating and diuretic if taken in water or wine , and that SOL the pounded leaves of eucullus with vinegar cure the bites of serpents and the stings of scorpions .
Some give this plant another name , strumus , others the Greek name of strychnus .
It has black berries ; a cyathus of juice from these , with two of honey wine , is good treatment for lumbago , as also for headache if used with rose oil for bathing the brow , while for serofulous sores the plant itself is applied locally .
SOL Couferva is peculiar to running streams , Alpine in particular , so named from confer-vamainare , to solder together .
It is more like a freshwater sponge than a moss or vascular plant , being a hairy , dense , and porous mass .
To my knowledge a man who , pruning a very high tree , fell and broke nearly all his bones , was treated with this plant .
His entire body was enveloped in it ; whenever it dried it was sprinkled with its native water but rarely taken off , only in fact for renewals when the plant lost its strength .
The patient recovered in an almost incredibly short time .
SOL The Cnidian grain has the colour of kermes-red , and in size is larger than a peppercorn .
Its heating properties are so great that it is swallowed in bread , lest it should scorch the throat in its passage .
A sovereign remedy for hemlock poisoning , it also checks looseness of the bowels .
SOL Dipsacos has leaves like those of lettuce , with prickly knobs on the middle of their backs .
The stem , two cubits long and rough with the same prickles , has joints enfolded by pairs of leaves , forming hollow axils in which collects a salt , dewy fluid .
On the top of the stem are little heads , which bristle with prickles .
The plant grows on watery ground .
A decoction of the root in wine heals chaps of the anus ; fistulas as well , but the decoction must be reduced to the consistency of wax , so that a suppository may be inserted into the fistula .
It also removes warts of all kinds , for which purpose some apply the juice that is found in the axils which I mentioned above .
SOL Dryopteris , which is like fern , grows on trees ; it has sweetish leaves with a slight indentation and a hairy root .
It has caustic properties , so that its crushed root is also used as a depilatory , for it is rubbed on until the skin sweats , and then again and a third time without washing the sweat away .
SOL Drabe is a similar plant to phonos , with slender stalks a cubit high surrounded on either side by leaves the size of a thumb , similar to those of oxymyrsine , but whiter and softer .
The blossom is white and like that of the elder .
The stalks are eaten boiled , but its seed is used instead of pepper .
SOL Elatine has leaves like those of cassia , very small , shaggy and round , with five or six little branches , half a foot long , which are covered with leaves right from the root .
The plant grows among the corn , is harsh to the taste and therefore good for fluxes of the eyes ; the leaves are pounded with pearl barley and applied , a napkin being placed underneath .
The plant boiled with linseed makes a gruel that cures dysentery .
SOL Empetros , called calcifraga by us Romans , is found on coastal mountains , generally on a rock .
When it has grown near the sea it is salt , and taken in drink brings away bile and phlegms ; when farther off and in deeper soil it tastes more bitter .
It brings away fluid , and is taken in broth of some kind or in hydromel .
When stale it loses its potency , but when fresh and boiled down in water or beaten up it is diuretic and breaks up stone in the bladder .
Those who seek to win belief in this assurance assert that pebbles boiled with it are broken up .
SOL Epicactis , called by some elleborine , is a small plant with tiny leaves ; taken in drink it is very useful for liver complaints and to counteract poisons .
SOL Epimedion is a stem , not large , with ten or even twelve leaves like ivy leaves .
It never flowers , has a slender , blackish , evil-smelling root , and ...[ an insipid taste ?
] This plant , which grows in damp soils , is one of those with bracing and cooling properties , and should be avoided by women .
Its leaves , beaten up in wine , check the growth of maidens' breasts .
SOL Enneaphyllon has nine long leaves , and is of caustic nature .
When applied it is wrapped up in wool , lest it cauterize too far , for it raises blisters immediately .
It is very good for the pains of lumbago and sciatica .
SOL Ferns are of two kinds , neither having blossom or seed .
Some Greeks call pteris , others blachnon , the kind from the sole root of which shoot out several other ferns exceeding even two cubits in length , with a not unpleasant smell .
This is considered male .
The other kind the Greeks call thelypteris , some nymphaea pteris .
It has only one stem , and is not bushy , but shorter , softer and more compact than the other , and channelled with leaves at the root .
The root of both kinds fattens pigs .
In both kinds the leaves are pinnate on either side , whence the Greeks have named them pteris .
The roots of both are long , slanting , and blackish , especially when they have lost moisture ; they should , however , be dried in the sun .
Ferns grow everywhere , but especially in a cold soil .
They ought to be dug up at the setting of the Pleiades .
The root must be used only at the end of three years , neither earlier nor later .
Ferns expel intestinal worms , tapeworms when taken with honey , but for other worms they must be taken in sweet wine on three consecutive days ; both kinds are very injurious to the stomach .
Fern opens the bowels , bringing away first bile , then fluid .
tapeworms better with an equal weight of scammony .
To treat catarrhal fluxes two oboli by weight of the root are taken in water after fasting for one day , with a taste of honey beforehand .
Neither fern should be given to women , since either causes a miscarriage when they are pregnant , and barrenness when they are not .
Reduced to powder they are sprinkled over foul ulcers as well as on the necks of draught animals .
The leaves kill lice and will not harbour snakes , so that it is well to spread them in suspected places ; by the smell too when burnt they drive away these creatures .
Among ferns also physicians have their preference ; the Macedonian is the best , the next best comes from Cassiope ?
SOL Femur bubulum (' ox thigh ') is the name given to a plant which , applied fresh and beaten up in vinegar and salt , is one of the remedies beneficial for the sinews .
SOL Galeopsis , called by some galeobdolon or galion , has stem and leaves like those of the nettle , but smoother , and giving off when beaten up an offensive smell ; the flower is purple .
It grows along hedges and lanes everywhere .
Its leaves and stalks , beaten up in vinegar and applied , cure indurations and malignant growths , dispersing scrofulous sores , superficial abscesses and parotid swellings .
It is also beneficial to use the juice of a decoction as a fomentation .
With the addition of salt moreover it heals festering sores and gangrenes .
SOL Glaux , called of old eugalacton , has leaves like those of cytisus and the lentil ; they are whiter underneath .
The branches , five or six in number , extremely slender and springing from the root , lie along the ground ; on them form small , purple blossoms .
It is found near the sea , and is boiled in similago porridge to stimulate a rich supply of milk ; those who have drunk a dose should proceed to a bath .
SOL Glaucion grows in Syria and Parthia , a low plant , with tightly packed leaves , rather like those of the poppy but smaller and dirtier looking ; it has a foul smell and a bitter , astringent taste .
The seed , of a saffron colour , is put into a pot lined with fuller 's clay and heated in an oven .
Then it is taken out , and a juice of the same name is extracted from it .
Both the juice and beaten-up leaves are used for the fluxes that fall in streams from the whole eye .
There is made from it a salve called by physicians diaglaucin .
It also restores a rich supply of milk if this fails .
When taken for this purpose , water is the medium .
SOL Glycyside , called by some paeonia or pentorobon , has a stem two spans high ; two or three others go with it .
This stem is reddish , with bark like that of bay ; the leaves resemble those of isatis , only more fleshy , rounder , and smaller .
The seed is in pods , with some grains red , some black .
There are however two kinds of the plant .
The one to the roots of which are attached about six or eight rather long bulbs like acorns is regarded as female .
The male has no more bulbs , since it is supported only by a single root , a span deep , white , and astringent to the taste .
The leaves of the female smell of myrrh , and are closer together .
The plants grow in woods .
It is said that they should be dug up by night , because to do so in the daytime is dangerous , for the woodpecker called ' bird of Mars' assaults the eyes .
That there is a danger , however , of prolapsus of the anus when a root is being dug up , I hold to be a very fraudulent lie , calculated to exaggerate the real facts .
These plants are of manifold use .
The red grains check red menstrual discharge , about fifteen being taken in dark-red wine .
The black grains are healing to the uterus , the same number being taken in raisin or ordinary wine .
The root in wine relieves all pains of the belly , opens the bowels , cures opisthotonic tetanus , jaundice , and complaints of the kidneys and bladder ; for the trachea and the stomach however a decoction in wine is used , which also acts astringently on the bowels .
It is eaten too as a food , but as a medicine four drachmae are enough .
The black grains , taken in wine to the number mentioned , also prevent nightmares , while for stomach ache and for gnawing colic it is beneficial both to eat them and to apply them locally .
Suppurations too are dispersed , recent by the black seed and old by the red .
Both kinds are good for snakebites , and to cure stone in children when strangury is beginning .
SOL Gnaphalium is called by some chamaezelon ; its pale , soft leaves are used as flock ; the two indeed are similar .
It is given in a dry wine for dysentery , arrests fluxes of the belly and excessive menstruation , is injected for tenesmus and applied to festering ulcers .
SOL Xenocrates calls gallidraga a prickly marsh-plant like leucacanthus , with a tall stem like fennel-giant , on the top of which is perched an egg-shaped ball .
In this , he says , as summer advances , are bred maggots , which are kept in a box and attached with bread , as an amulet , to the arm on the same side as an aching tooth , and the pain disappears at once in a wonderful manner .
These maggots , he says , retain their potency for not more than a year , and then only if they have not touched the ground .
SOL Holcus grows on dry rocks .
The plant is like barley that has grown again after cutting , with ears at the top of a slender straw .
Tied round the head or round the arm this plant draws ears ( orisias ) from the flesh , for which reason some call it aristis .
SOL Hyoseris is like endive , but smaller and rougher to the touch ; crushed it is a splendid remedy for wounds .
SOL Holosteon ( all-bone ) is a plant with nothing hard about it , the name being an antiphrasis coined by the Greeks , just as they call gall sweet .
Its root is so slender as to look like hair .
Four fingers long , the plant has narrow leaves like grass and an astringent taste , growing on hills with deep soil .
Taken in wine for sprains and ruptures it also closes wounds , for it even fastens together pieces of meat when boiled with them .
SOL Hippophaeston is to be found among the thorns out of which fullers' pots are made up , having no stem , no blossom , but only little , hollow heads and many small leaves of the colour of grass .
Its little roots are whitish and soft .
Their juice is extracted in summer ; the dose to open the bowels is three oboli , being used especially in epilepsy , palsy , dropsy , and to treat giddiness , orthopnoea , and incipient paralysis .
SOL Hypoglossa has leaves shaped like those of wild myrtle , concave , prickly , and on them as it were tongues , small leaves growing out of the leaves proper .
A chaplet made from these and placed on the head relieves headache .
SOL Hypecod grows in cornfields and has leaves like those of rue .
Its properties are those of poppy juice .
SOL The plant of Ida has leaves like those of oxymyrsine , and to them adhere as it were tendrils , which bear the blossom .
The plant itself cheeks looseness of the bowels , menstruation , and all excessive bleeding , as it has astringent , and repressive properties .
SOL Isopyron is called by some phaselion , because its leaf , which resembles that of anise , twists itself into the shape of the tendrils of the passeolus .
At the top of the stem grow little heads , slender , full of seed like that of melanthium , and very efficacious , when taken with honey or hydromel , for cough , other chest complaints , and also those of the liver .
SOL Lathyris has many leaves like those of lettuce , but slighter , and many buds , in which the seed is enclosed in envelopes as is that of the caper .
When the buds are dry , the seeds , of the size of a peppercorn , are taken out ; they are white , sweet , and easily shelled .
Twenty of them in fresh water or hydromel cure dropsy , and also draw away bile .
Those who wish for a more violent purge take the pods themselves with the seeds , but since they injure the stomach the plan has been devised of taking them with fish or chicken broth .
SOL Leontopetalon , called by some rapadion , has leaves like cabbage leaves and a stem half a foot long .
There are several side branches , and at the ends , in pods like those of chick-peas , is the seed .
The root is like a turnip , large and blackish .
It grows on cultivated ground .
Taken in wine the root neutralises the poison of serpents of every kind [ or ' of the bites of all serpents '] , and no other remedy acts more quickly .
It is also given to sufferers from sciatica .
SOL Lycapsos has longer and coarser leaves than those of lettuce , a long stem , with many subsidiary others , hairy and a cubit long , and a small , purple flower .
It grows in flat , meadowy land .
With barley meal it makes a local application for erysipelas .
The juice with hot water added promotes perspiration in fevers .
SOL Among all plants nothing is more wonderful than lithospermum , called by some exonychon , by others ' Juppiter 's corn ,' and by others ' corn of Hercules .
' The plant is about five inches high , with leaves twice as big as those of rue , and ligneous little branches of the thickness of a rush .
Near the leaves it grows as it were little beards , which are single , and on their tops little stones , white and round as pearls , as big as a chick-pea but as hard as a stone .
Where they are attached to pedicels these jewels have little holes , in which is the seed .
The plant grows indeed in Italy , but the most highly valued in Crete , and I have never seen anything among plants that filled me with greater wonder .
So charming the adornment that one might think that the jeweller 's art had arranged gleaming white pearls symmetrically among the leaves ; very exquisite and difficult the birth of a gem from a plant !
The authorities say that it lies and spreads over the ground ; have seen it only when gathered , not when so growing .
It is indisputable that a drachma by weight of these jewels taken in white wine breaks up and brings away stone , and cures strangury .
There is no other plant the medicinal property of which can be recognised with greater confidence ; its very appearance is such that at once by a glance , even without being told , people can become aware of this property .
SOL On ordinary stones near rivers grows a dry , hoary moss .
One of them is rubbed with another one smeared with human spittle ; with the latter stone is touched eczema , and he who touches says : ' Begone , cantharides , for a savage wolf seeks your blood .
' SOL Limeum is the name given by the Gauls to a plant that they use to make a drug , called by them deer poison , with which when hunting they poison their arrows .
As much of the plant as is usually used for one arrow is mixed with three bushels of saliva stimulant , and when cattle are sick this mash is forced down their throats .
Afterwards they must be tied to their stalls until they are purged — for they usually go wild — and if sweating ensues cold water should be poured over them .
SOL Leuce , a plant like mercurialis , has a reason for the name it bears , because a white line runs down the middle of the leaves , which is why some call it mesoleucion .
Its juice heals fistulas ; crushed , the plant itself cures malignant ulcers .
Perhaps it is the same as the plant called leueas , which is a remedy for the poison of all sea creatures .
My authorities do not report its appearance ; they only say that the wild plant has the broader leaves , that this is the more efficacious , and has the more pungent seed .
SOL A description of leucographis I have nowhere found in writing .
I am the more surprised at this because in three-obol doses with saffron it is considered useful for haemoptysis , and also for the coeliae disease ; beaten up in water and applied as a pessary for excessive menstruation ; useful too as an ingredient of eye salves , and for filling up ulcers that form on tender parts of the body .
SOL Medion has leaves like those of cultivated seris ; the stem is three feet long , on which is a large , purple , round flower , bearing tiny seeds ; the root is half a foot long .
The plant grows on shaded rocks .
The root checks excessive menstruation , two-drachma doses , with honey , being taken in the form of an electuary for a few successive days .
For the same purpose the seed too is given in wine .
SOL Myosota or myosotis is a smooth plant with several stems growing from one root , these being red to a certain extent and hollow ; narrow leaves grow at the bottom , longish , with a spine along the back , dark , carefully arranged in pairs at regular intervals .
There are slender stalks growing from the axils , and the blossom is blue .
The root , of the thickness of a finger , is fringed with many filaments like hairs .
It has septic and ulcerating properties , and so heals lacrimal fistulas .
The Egyptians say that if , on the twenty-eighth day of the month they call thoth ( a day generally falling in our August ) , you rub yourself over in the morning with the juice of this plant before speaking to anyone , you will not in that year a suffer from ophthahnia .
SOL Myagros is a plant like fennel-giant , with leaves like those of madder ; it is three feet high .
The seed is oily , and from it is extracted an oil .
This juice , used as liniment , is good treatment for an ulcerated mouth .
SOL The plant called nyma , with its three long leaves like those of endive , makes a liniment that restores the colour of a skin disfigured by scars .
SOL Natrix is the name of a plant the root of which , when pulled up , gives out the foul smell of he-goats .
In Picenum they use this plant to drive away from women what are , with a strange credulity , called Fatui .
I myself should believe that it is the hallucination of minds delirious in this way that is helped by such a drugs .
SOL Odontitis is classed as a hay with close-set stalks growing from the same root , jointed , triangular and dark .
At the joints it has small leaves , longer however than those of polygonum , seed like barley in the axils , and a tiny , bright red flower .
It grows in meadows .
A decoction of its stalks , a handful in a dry wine , is a cure for toothache , but it must be kept in the mouth .
SOL Othonna grows in Syria .
It is like eruca , has leaves full of holes and a saffron flower .
This is why some have called it anemone .
Its juice is a suitable ingredient of eye salves , for it is slightly biting , warming , and astringent , because of its drying nature ; it clears away scars , films and all obstructions .
Some say that it is washed , and then , after drying , worked up into lozenges .
SOL Onosma has long leaves up to about three fingers in length , lying on the ground like those of anchusa .
It has no stem , no blossom and no seed .
If a woman with child should eat it or step over it , she is said to miscarry .
SOL Asses are said , if they have eaten onopradon , to break wind .
It is diuretic and an emmenagogue , checks looseness of the bowels , and disperses suppurations and gatherings .
SOL Osyris bears dark twigs , slender and pliant , on which are dark leaves like those of flax .
The seed on the twigs is black to begin with , and then the colour changes to red .
From them are made cosmetics for women .
A decoction of the roots taken by the mouth cures jaundice .
These roots also , if cut off before the seed ripens and dried in the sun , check looseness of the bowels ; but , if dug up after the ripening and boiled down in gruel , they are good treatment for catarrhs of the belly , and by themselves they are beaten up and taken in rain water .
SOL Oxys has three leaves .
It is given for a relaxed stomach , and is also eaten by sufferers from intestinal hernia .
SOL Polyanthemum , called by some batrachion , with its caustic property clears away scars and brings back a healthy colour .
It also effaces psoriasis .
SOL Polygonum is the name given by the Greeks to the plant we Romans call sanguinaria .
It does not rise from the ground , has leaves like those of rue , and resembles grass .
Its juice poured into the nostrils checks epistaxis , and taken with wine stays haemorrhage in any part of the body and the spitting of blood .
Those who hold that there are several kinds of polygonum would have this to be considered the male plant , and to be so named because of the great number of its seeds or from its being a shrub with close-packed branches .
Some call it polygonaton from its many joints , others thalattias or carcinothron or clema , many myrtopetalum .
There are also to be found some who say that this kind is the female , and that the male is larger , less dark , with the joints closer together , and swelling with seed under all the leaves .
However this may be , the property of these plants is to be astringent and to cool .
Their seed relaxes the bowels , and taken in larger doses is diuretic ; it checks catarrhs , and if these have not occurred it is of no uses The leaves are applied to a heated stomach , and also used to make liniment for a painful bladder and for erysipclas .
The juice is also dropped into purulent ears and painful eyes .
It used also to be given by itself in doses of two cyathi , before the paroxysms of agues , especially tertian and quartan , also for cholera , dysentery and a relaxed stomach .
The third kind , called orion , grows on mountains and is like a tender reed .
It has one stem with knots close together and fitted one into another , leaves resembling those of the pitch pine , and a root of no medicinal use .
This kind is less efficacious than those already mentioned , and used especially for sciatica .
The fourth kind is called wild polygonum , a shrub that is almost a tree ; it has a ligneous root , a red trunk like that of the cedar , branches like those of spartum , two spans long , and with three or four dark , knotted joints .
This kind too is of an astringent nature , and tastes like a quince .
It is boiled down in water to one third , or dried and powdered for sprinkling on ulcerations of the mouth and excoriated bruises , but for sore gums the plant itself is chewed .
It arrests corrosive ulcers , and all those that spread or are slow to heal ; for frostbite however it is specific .
Herbalists also use it for quinsy ; for headache they make a chaplet of it which they place on the head ; while to cure eye fluxes they put one round the neck .
For tertian ague some pluck it with the left hand and attach it as an amulet , and for haemorrhage also .
There is no other plant that they keep in a dry state more than they do polygonum .
SOL Pancratium some prefer to call ' little squill .
' It has leaves resembling those of the white lily , but longer and thicker , and a root like a large , red bulb .
Its juice taken with retch flour relaxes the bowels and cleans ulcers .
With honey it is given for dropsy and affections of the spleen .
Others boil it down until the water becomes sweet , pour this off , pound the root , and work it into lozenges , which they dry in the sun and use afterwards for sores on the head and all other ailments that call for a detergent .
Moreover , they give in wine a three-finger pinch for cough , and an electuary made of it for pleurisy or pneumonia .
They also give it to be taken in wine for sciatica , for colic , and as an emmenagogue .
SOL Peplis , called by some syce , by others meconion or meconaphrodes , grows into a shrub from one slender root , and has leaves like those of rue but a little broader .
Under the leaves is a round seed , smaller than that of the white poppy .
It is generally gathered among vines at harvest time , and is dried with its seed after a vessel has been placed beneath to catch this .
Taken in drink it relaxes the bowels , bringing away bile and phlegm .
A moderate dose is an acetabulum in three heminae of hydromel .
It is sprinkled over foods and relishes to loosen the bowels .
SOL Periclymenon too is a plant which grows into a shrub , having after an interval two leaves which are whitish and soft .
And at the top among the leaves is a seed which is hard , and difficult to pluck .
The plant grows in cultivated fields and in hedges , climbing round supports of any kind .
Its seed is dried in the shade , pounded , and worked up into lozenges .
These , dissolved in three cyathi of white wine , are given for thirty days to cure splenic affections , the spleen being reduced either by blood in the urine or through the bowels , as is plain immediately from the tenth day .
The boiled leaves too are diuretic , and also beneficial to asthmatics ; they aid delivery and bring away the afterbirth if taken in drink in a similar way .
SOL Pelecinos I have said grows in cornfields .
It makes a bushy plant with its stalks , and has leaves like those of the chick-pea .
It bears seed , like git seed as we know it , in three or four pods curved like little horns .
This seed is bitter , a good stomachic , and an ingredient of antidotes .
SOL Polygala is a full span in height , with leaves , like those of lentil , on the top of the stem , and with an astringent taste .
Taken in drink it promotes an abundant supply of milk .
SOL Poterion , or as some call it , phrynion or neuras , is a spreading shrub , shrivelled and prickly , with thick down , small round leaves , long branches that are soft , flexible and slender , and a long flower of a grass-green colour .
The seed is not used in medicine , but has a sham , aromatic taste .
The plant is found on moist hills .
It has two or three roots , two cubits in depth , sinewy , white and firm .
It is dug np in autumn , and when the shrub has been cut away , the root yields a juice like gum .
An application of the root is said to be a wonderful healer of wounds , especially of sinews even when they have been severed .
A decoction of the root also , taken with honey , is good for relaxed , weak , or cut sinews .
SOL Phalangitis is called by some phalangion , by others leucanthemum , or , as I find in some copies , leucacantha .
It has little branches , never fewer than two , which grow in opposite directions ; white flowers like the red lily in shape , a black , broad seed , of the shape of half a lentil , but much thinner , and a slender root of a grass-green colour .
The leaves , flowers or seed of this plant are of help for the treatment of wounds inflicted by scorpions , poisonous spiders , and serpents ; they are also good for griping colic .
SOL To describe phyteuma is in my opinion a waste of time , because it is used only for love-philtres .
SOL Phyllon is the name given by the Greeks to a plant that grows on rocky heights .
The female is more grass-green in colour than the male , with a slender stem and a small root .
The seed is like the round seed of a poppy .
This kind causes births of its own sex , the male those of males , differing from the female merely in its seed , which resembles that of the olive when it is just beginning to form .
Both kinds are taken in wine .
SOL Phelandrion grows in marshy places , and has leaves resembling celery .
Its seed is taken in drink for stone and troubles of the bladder .
SOL Phaleris has a stalk which is long and slender as a reed ; at the top is a drooping flower ; the seed resembles sesame seed , and is one of the remedies that break up stone in the bladder , being taken in wine , vinegar , or with honey and milk ; it also cures complaints of the bladder .
SOL Polyrrhizon has leaves like those of myrtle , and many roots .
These are pounded and given in wine for snake bite .
They are also of benefit when quadrupeds are bitten .
SOL Proserpinaca is a common plant , and an excellent remedy for scorpion stings .
It also , they say , when thoroughly crushed and with the addition of brine and sprats oil , makes an excellent remedy for quinsy ; moreover , however tired one may be , even so weary as to lose one 's voice , to put it under the tongue is said to dispel the fatigue ; also that to swallow it results in healthful vomiting .
SOL Rhecoma is imported from the regions beyond Pontus .
The root resembles dark costus , but is smaller and a little redder , without smell but with a hot , astringent taste .
When pounded it also is of a wine-like colour , but inclining to saffron .
Used as liniment it reduces gatherings and inflammations , and heals wounds ; in raisin wine it relieves eye-fluxes ; with honey it removes dark bruises , and in vinegar other livid marks .
Powdered it is sprinkled over malignant sores ; for spitting of blood a drachma by weight is taken in water ; for dysentery too and coeliac disease , should no fever be present , it is given in wine , but where there is fever , in water .
It is easier to pound if it is steeped the night before .
Its decoction too is given , to be drunk in double doses , for ruptures , sprains , bruises , and tumbles from a height .
Should there be pains in the chest , a little quantity of pepper and myrrh is added ; should the stomach be relaxed , it is taken in cold water ; so also for chronic cough and spitting of pus , likewise for liver complaints , spleen complaints , sciatica , kidney troubles , asthma , and orthopnoea .
Roughness of the trachea is cured by three-oboli doses of it pounded and taken in raisin wine , or by its decoction .
Lichen also is cleared away by an application of the root in vinegar .
It is taken in drink for flatulence , chills , feverish shivers , hiccough , colic , herpes , heaviness of the head , bilious giddiness , tired pains , and sprains .
SOL Around Ariminum is well known the plant called reseda .
It disperses all gatherings and inflammations .
Those who use it in treatment add these words : Reseda , allay diseases ; Dost know , dost know , what chick here uprooted thee ?
May he have neither head nor feet .
They say these words three times , and spit three times on the ground .
SOL Stoechas grows only in the islands of the same name , a fragrant plant with the foliage of hyssop and a bitter taste .
Taken in drink it is an emmenagogue , and relieves pains in the chest .
It is also an ingredient of antidotes .
SOL Solanum according to Cornelius Celsus is called by the Greeks .
It has repressive and cooling properties .
SOL Smyrnion has a stem like that of celery , and rather broad leaves , which grow mostly about its many shoots , from the curve of which they spring ; they are juicy , bending towards the ground , and with a drug-like smell not unpleasing with a sort of sharpness .
The colour shades off to yellow ; the heads of the stems are umbellate , as are those of celery ; the seed is round and black .
It withers at the beginning of summer .
The root too has a smell , and a sharp , biting taste , being soft and full of juice .
Its skin is dark on the outside , but the inside is pale .
The smell has the character of myrrh , whence too the plant gets its name .
It grows on rocky hills , and also on those with plenty of earth .
It is used for warming and for reducing .
Leaves , root , and seed are diuretic and emmenagogues .
The root binds the bowels , and an application of it disperses gatherings and suppurations , if not chronic , as well as indurations ; mixed with cachry , polium , or melissophyllum , it is also taken in wine to counteract the poison of spiders and serpents , but only a little at a time , for if taken all at once it acts as an emetic , and so is sometimes given with rue .
Seed or root is a remedy for cough and orthopnoea , also for affections of thorax , spleen , kidneys or bladder , and the root is for ruptures and sprains ; it also facilitates delivery and brings away the afterbirth .
In wine with crethmos it is also given for sciatica .
It promotes sweating and belching , and therefore dispels flatulence of the stomach .
It causes wounds to cicatrize .
There is also extracted from the root a juice useful for female ailments , and for affections of the thorax and of the hypochondria , for it is warming , digestive and cleansing .
The seed is given in drink , especially for dropsy , for which the juice also is used as liniment .
The dried skin is used in plasters , and also as a side-dish with honey wine , oil and garum , especially when the meat is boiled .
SOL Sinon tastes very like pepper and aids digestion .
It also is very good for pain in the stomach .
SOL Telephion resembles purslane in both stem and leaves .
Seven or eight branches from the root make a bushy plant with coarse , fleshy leaves .
It grows on cultivated ground , especially among vines .
It is used as liniment for freckles and rubbed off when dry ; it makes liniment also for psoriasis , to be applied for about three months , six hours each night or day ; afterwards barley meal should be applied .
It is also good treatment for wounds and fistulas .
SOL Trichomanes resembles adiantum , but is thinner and darker ; the leaves are like those of the lentil , closely set , small , and opposite one another .
The decoction , taken in white wine , with wild cummin added , cures strangury .
Eaten as food it prevents hair falling off , or if it has already done so , restores it .
Beaten up and applied in oil it makes a thick growth when there is mange .
Sneezing too is provoked by the taste .
SOL Thalictrum has coriander-like leaves , but a little more fleshy , and the stem of a poppy .
It grows everywhere , but particularly in flat , meadowy country .
The leaves with honey are good treatment for ulcers .
SOL Thlaspi is of two kinds .
One has narrow leaves , a finger in breadth and length , turned towards the ground , and divided at the tip .
The stem is half a foot long , not without branches , and with seed enclosed in shield-like pods and shaped like a lentil , except that — hence comes the name — it is indented .
The blossom is white , and the plant grows in lanes and in hedges .
The seed has a sharp taste and brings away bile and phlegm by both vomit and stools .
The measure of a dose is an acetabulum .
Injections are good for sciatica , if continued until they draw blood .
It is also an emmenagogue but kills the foetus .
The other thlaspi is called by some Persicon napy ; it has broad leaves and large roots , while the plant itself is useful to make an injection for sciatica .
Both kinds are good for affections of the groin .
The picker is recommended to say that he is taking it as a remedy for the groin , all kinds of gatherings , and wounds .
He should lift it with one hand .
SOL We are not told the nature of the plant trachinia .
I think it untrue , and the assurance of Democritus fantastic , that used as an amulet it consumes the spleen in three days .
SOL Tragonis , or tragion , grows only on the shores of the island of Crete , and resembles juniper in seed , leaf and branches .
Its milky juice , hardened into gum , or its seed taken in drink , brings away sharp points embedded in the flesh .
For use as liniment it is beaten up when fresh and applied with wine , or it is dried , powdered , and applied with honey .
It also promotes abundance of milk , and is a specific for ailments of the breasts .
SOL There is also another plant , tragos , called by some scorpion , half a foot high , bushy , without leaves , and bearing tiny red clusters with wheat-like seeds , and pointed at the extremity .
This plant too grows in coastal districts .
Ten or twelve extremities of clusters , pounded and taken in wine , are good for coeliac affections , dysentery , spitting of blood , and excessive menstruation .
SOL There is also tragopogon , called by some come with a small stem , leaves like those of saffron , a long , sweet root , and at the top of the stem a broad , dark calyx .
It grows on rugged soils , and is eaten but never used in medicine .
SOL Such is all that I have been told or discovered worth recording about plants .
At the close , I think it not out of place to add a warning that their properties vary with their age .
As I have said , elaterium lasts longest , dark chamaeleon forty years , centaury not more than twelve , peucedanum and aristolochia up to six , and the wild vine one year — that is , if they are kept in the shade .
And of external animals indeed none attack the roots that I have mentioned except the sphondyle , a kind of creeping thing , which infests them all .
SOL There is no doubt either that the potency and efficacy of all roots are lessened if the fruit ripens before they are dug , and it is the same with seeds if the root has been cut previously for the sake of the juice .
The properties moreover of all plants are weakened by habit , and they cease to be beneficial when needed if they have been in daily use ; similarly with harmful plants .
All plants however have greater efficacy and potency when they grow in cold regions subject to north-east winds , and likewise those that grow in dry .
SOL There are also considerable differences between races .
I have heard for instance about tapeworms and maw-worms , that they infest the peoples of Egypt , Arabia , Syria and Cilicia , while on the contrary they are never found at all among those of Thrace and Phrygia .
This is less remarkable than their being found among the Thebans , but not among the Athenians , although Attica and Boeotia are adjoining territories .
That thought brings me to the nature of animals themselves , and to the remedies for all diseases , of even greater reliability , that are implanted in them at birth .
For again , the Mother of all creation both willed that no animal should be born merely to eat or to satisfy the appetites of others , implanting also healthful medicines in their vitals , because she was implanting them even in unconscious things , and she also willed that those outstanding aids to life should come from another life , a thought beyond all else most wonderful .
SOL
