IN order that the work that I have undertaken may be complete , it remains for me to discuss gemstones .
Here Nature 's grandeur is gathered together within the narrowest limits ; and in no domain of hers evokes more wonder in the minds of many who set such store by the variety , the colours , the texture and the elegance of gems that they think it a crime to tamper with certain kinds by engraving them as signets , although this is the prime reason for their use ; while some they consider to be beyond price and to deft evaluation in terms of human wealth .
Hence very many people find that a single gemstone alone is enough to provide them with a supreme and perfect aesthetic experience of the wonders of Nature .
SOL The origin of the use of gemstones and the beginning of our present enthusiasm for them , which has blazed into so violent a passion , I have already discussed to some extent in my references to gold and to rings .
According to the myths , which offer a pernicious misinterpretation of Prometheus' fetters , the wearing of rings originated on the crags of the Caucasus .
It was of this rock that a fragment was for the first time enclosed in an iron bezel and placed on a finger ; and this , we are told , was the first ring , and this the first gemstone .
SOL Hence arose the esteem in which gemstones are held ; and this soared into such a passion that to Polycrates of Samos , the overlord of islands and coasts , the voluntary sacrifice of a single gemstone seemed a sufficient atonement for his prosperity , which even he himself , the happy recipient , owned to he excessive .
Thereby he hoped to settle his account with the fickleness of Fortune .
Clearly he supposed that he would be fully indemnified against her ill-will if he , who was weary of unremitting happiness , suffered this one unhappy experience .
Accordingly , he put out in a boat and threw the ring into deep water .
The ring , however , was seized as bait by a huge fish , fit for a king , which restored the ring as an evil omen to its owner in his own kitchen , thanks to Fortune 's treacherous intervention .
The gem , it is agreed , was a sardonyx and is displayed in Rome ( if we can believe that this is the original stone ) in the temple of Concord , set in a golden horn .
It was presented by the empress and is ranked almost last in a collection containing many gems that are valued more highly .
SOL After this ring , the most renowned gemstone is that of another king , the famous Pyrrhus who [ 319-272 BC ] fought a war against Rome .
He is said to have possessed an agate on which could be seen the Nine Muses with Apollo holding his lyre .
This was due not to any artistic intention , but to nature unaided ; and the markings spread in such a way that even the individual Muses had their appropriate emblems allotted to them .
Apart from these stones , my authorities can produce no gems famous enough to be specially recorded .
They merely state that Ismenias the pipe-player was in the habit of wearing a large number of brilliant stones and that there is a story associated with his vanity .
In Cyprus a ' smaragdus' with the figure of Amymone engraved upon it was offered for sale at a price of six gold pieces .
Ismenias ordered the sum to be paid and , when two of the pieces were returned to him , he exclaimed , ' Heavens !
I 've been done .
The stone has been robbed of much of its value .
' It is Ismenias who appears to have brought in the fashion whereby all musical accomplishments came to be assessed partly in terms of this kind of lavish display .
This was the case with his contemporary and rival Dionysodorus .
Consequently , Ismenias seemed to be equalled through this very circumstance by a man who was only third among the musicians of the time .
As for Nicomachus , he is said to have possessed merely large numbers of stones chosen without any discrimination .
SOL But it is more or less accidentally that in prefacing the present volume I have quoted these instances as a criticism of those despicable people who in making such a display of their gems claim the right to show the world that their vanity and conceit is that of a piper .
SOL And now to resume : the gemstone displayed as that of Polycrates is in its natural state , unmarked by engravings .
In the time of Ismenias , many years later , it seems evident that it had become customary to engrave even ' smaragdi .
' This impression is supported , moreover , by an edict of Alexander the Great forbidding his likeness to be engraved on this stone by anyone except Pyrgoteles , who was undoubtedly the most brilliant artist in this field .
Next to him in fame have been Apollonides , Cronius and the man who made the excellent likeness of Augustus of revered memory which his successors have used as their seal , namely Dioscurides .
Sulla as dictator always used a signet representing the surrender of Jugurtha .
We learn from our authorities also that the native of Intercatia , whose father had been slain by Scipio Aemilianus after challenging him to single combat , used a signet representing this fight .
Hence the familiar witticism made by Stilo Praeconinus , who remarked , ' What would he have done if Scipio had been killed by his father ?
' Augustus of revered memory at the beginning of his career used a signet engraved with a sphinx , having found among his mother 's rings two such signets which were so alike as to be indistinguishable .
During the Civil Wars , one of these was used by his personal advisers , whenever he himself was absent , for signing any letters and proclamations which the circumstances required to be despatched in his name .
The recipients used to make a neat joke saying ' the Sphinx brings its problems .
' Of course , the frog signet belonging to Maecenas was also greatly feared because of the contributions of money that it demanded .
In later years Augustus , wishing to avoid insulting comments about the sphinx , signed his documents with a likeness of Alexander the Great .
SOL The first Roman to own a collection of gemstones ( for which we normally use the foreign term ' dactyliotheca ,' or ' ring cabinet ') was Sulla 's stepson Scaurus .
For many years there was no other until Pompey the Great dedicated in the Capitol among his other offerings a ring cabinet that had belonged to King Mithridates .
This , as Varro and other authorities of the period confirm , was far inferior to that of Scaurus .
Pompey 's example was followed by Julius Caesar , who during his dictatorship consecrated six cabinets of gems in the temple of Venus Genetrix , and by Marcellus , Octavia 's son , who dedicated one in the temple of Apollo on the Palatine .
SOL However , it was this victory of Pompey over Mithridates that made fashion veer to pearls and gemstones .
The victories of Lucius Scipio and of Cnaeus Manlius had done the same for chased silver , garments of cloth of gold and dining couches inlaid with bronze ; and that of Mummius for Corinthian bronzes and fine paintings .
To make my point clearer , I shall append statements taken directly from official records of Pompey 's triumphs .
Thus , Pompey 's third triumph was held on his own birthday , September 29th of the year in which Marcus Piso and Marcus Messala were consuls , to celebrate his [ 61 B.C. ] conquest of the pirates , Asia , Pontus and all the peoples and kings mentioned in the seventh volume of this work .
In this triumph , then , there was carried in the procession a gaming-board complete with a set of pieces , the board being made of two precious minerals and measuring three feet broad and four feet long .
And in case anyone should doubt that our natural resources have become exhausted seeing that today no gems even approach such a size , there rested on this board a golden moon weighing 30 pounds .
There were also displayed three gold dining couches ; enough gold vessels inlaid with gems to fill nine display stands ; three gold figures of Minerva , Mars and Apollo respectively ; thirty-three pearl crowns ; a square mountain of gold with deer , lions and every variety of fruit on it and a golden vine entwined around it ; and a grotto of pearls , on the top of which there was a sundial .
Furthermore , there was Pompey 's portrait rendered in pearls , that portrait so pleasing with the handsome growth of hair swept back from the forehead , the portrait of that noble head revered throughout the world — that portrait , I say , that portrait was rendered in pearls .
Here it was austerity that was defeated and extravagance that more truly celebrated its triumph .
Never , I think , would his surname ' the Great ' have survived among the stalwarts of that age had he celebrated his first triumph in this fashion !
To think that it is of pearls , Great Pompey , those wasteful things meant only for women , of pearls , which you yourself cannot and must not wear , that your portrait is made !
To think that this is how you make yourself seem valuable !
Is not then the trophy that you placed upon the summit of the Pyrenees a better likeness of yourself ?
This , to be sure , would have been a gross and foul disgrace were it not rather to be deemed a cruel omen of Heaven 's wrath .
That head , so ominously manifested without its body in oriental splendour , bore a meaning which even then could not be mistaken .
But as for the rest of that triumph , how worthy it was of a good man and true !
200,000,000 sesterces were given to the State , 100,000,000 to the commanders and quaestors who had guarded the coasts and 6000 to each soldier .
However , he merely made it easier for us to excuse the conduct of the Emperor Gaius when , apart from other effeminate articles of clothing , he wore slippers sewn with pearls , or that of the Emperor Nero , when he had sceptres , actors' masks and travelling couches adorned with pearls .
Why , we seem to have lost even the right to criticize cups and other pieces of household equipment inlaid with gems or , again , rings with stones set in open bezels .
For compared with Pompey 's , there is no extravagance that can be considered to have been so harmful .
SOL It was the same victory that brought myrrhine ware for the first time to Rome .
Pompey was the first to dedicate myrrhine bowls and cups , which he set aside from the spoils of his triumphs for Jupiter of the Capitol .
Such vessels immediately passed into ordinary use , and there was a demand even for display stands a and tableware .
Lavish expenditure on this fashion is increasing every day ... an ex-consul , drank from a myrrhine cup for which he had given 70,000 sesterces , although it held just three pints .
He was so fond of it that he would gnaw its rim ; and yet the damage he thus caused only enhanced its value , and there is no other piece of myrrhine ware even today that has a higher price set upon it .
The amount of money squandered by this same man upon the other articles of this material in his possession can be gauged from their number , which was so great that , when Nero took them away from the man 's children and displayed them , they filled the private theatre in his gardens across the Tiber , a theatre which was large enough to satisfy even Nero 's desire to sing before a full house at the time when he was rehearsing for his appearance in Pompey 's theatre .
It was at this time that I saw the pieces of a single broken cup included in the exhibition .
It was decided that these , like the body of Alexander , should be preserved in a kind of catafalque for display , presumably as a sign of the sorrows of the age and the ill-will of Fortune .
When the ex-consul Titus Petronius was facing death , he broke , to spite Nero , a myrrhine dipper that had cost him 300,000 sesterces , thereby depriving the Emperor 's dining-room table of this legacy .
Nero , however , as was proper for an emperor , outdid everyone by paying 1,000,000 sesterces for a single bowl .
That one who was acclaimed as a victorious general and as Father of his Country should have paid so much in order to drink is a detail that we must formally record .
SOL Myrrhine vessels come to us from the East .
There the substance is found in several otherwise unremarkable localities , particularly within the kingdom of Parthia .
It is in Carmania , however , that the finest specimens exist .
The substance is thought to be a liquid which is solidified underground by heat .
In size the pieces are never larger than a small display stand , while in bulk they rarely equal the drinking vessels that we have discussed .
They shine , but without intensity ; indeed , it would be truer to say that they glisten rather than shine .
Their value lies in their varied colours : the veins , as they revolve , repeatedly vary from purple to white or a mixture of the two , the purple becoming fiery or the milk-white becoming red as though the new colour were passing through the vein .
Some people particularly appreciate the edges of a piece , where colours may be reflected such as we observe in the inner part of a rainbow .
Others prefer thick veins ( any trace of transparency or fading is always a fault ) and also specks and spots .
These spots do not protrude , but are usually flattened , like warts on the body .
The smell of the substance is also a merit .
SOL A cause contrary to the one mentioned is responsible for creating rock-crystal , for this is hardened by excessively intense freezing .
At any rate , it is found only in places where the winter snows freeze most thoroughly ; and that it is a kind of ice is certain : the Greeks have named it accordingly .
Rock-crystal also comes to us from the East , for that of India is preferred to any other .
It is found also in Asia Minor , where a very poor variety occurs around Alabanda and Orthosia and in the neighbouring districts , and likewise in Cyprus : in Europe excellent rock-crystal occurs in the ranges of the Alps .
Juba assures us that it is to be found also on an island called Necron , or Island of the Dead , in the Red Sea facing Arabia , as well as on the neighbouring one which produces peridot : here , according to him , a piece measuring a cubit in length was dug up by Ptolemy 's officer Pythagoras .
Cornelius Bocchus mentions , furthermore , that rock-crystal of quite exceptional weight was found in Portugal , in the Ammacensian mountains , when wells were being sunk to water-level .
The surprising remark is made by Xenocrates of Ephesus that in Asia Minor and Cyprus rock-crystal is turned up by the plough , for previously it was not thought to occur in soil , but only amidst rocks .
A more plausible statement made by the same Xenocrates is that it is also often carried down by torrents .
Sudines maintains that it occurs only in places that face south .
What is certain is that it is not found in well-watered localities , however cold the district may be , even if it is one where the rivers freeze down to the bed .
The inevitable conclusion is that rock-crystal is formed of moisture from the sky falling as pure snow .
For this reason , it cannot stand heat and is rejected except as a receptacle for cold drinks .
Why it is formed with hexagonal faces cannot be readily explained ; and any explanation is complicated by the fact that , on the one hand , its terminal points are not symmetrical and that , on the other , its faces are so perfectly smooth that no craftsmanship could achieve the same effect .
SOL The largest mass of rock-crystal ever seen by us is that which was dedicated in the Capitol by Livia , the wife of Augustus : this weighs about 150 pounds .
Xenocrates , just mentioned , records that as. he saw a vessel that could hold six gallons , and some authors mention one from India with a capacity of 4 pints .
What I myself can unequivocally affirm is that among the rocks of the Alps it generally forms in such inaccessible places that it has to be removed by men suspended from ropes .
Experts are familiar with the signs that indicate its presence .
Pieces of rock-crystal are impaired by numerous defects , for example by rough , solder-like excrescences , cloudy spots , occlusions of moisture that are sometimes hidden within it , or hard yet brittle cores , and also what are known as ' salt-specks .
' Some specimens display a bright red rust , and others fibres that look like flaws .
These can be concealed by the engraver .
Pieces , however , that have no defects are preferably left unengraved : these are known to the Greeks as ' acenteta ,' or ' lacking a core ,' and their colour is that of clear water , not of foam .
Finally , the weight of a piece is a part of its value .
I find that among doctors there is considered to be no more effective method of cauterizing parts that need such treatment than by means of a crystal ball so placed as to intercept the sun 's rays .
Rock-crystal provides yet another instance of a crazy addiction , for not many years ago a respectable married woman , who was by no means rich , paid 150,000 sesterces for a single dipper .
SOL Nero , on receiving a message that all was lost , broke two crystal cups in a final outburst of rage by dashing them to the ground .
This was the vengeance of one who wished to punish his whole generation , to make it impossible for any other man to drink from these cups .
Once it has been broken , rock-crystal cannot be mended by any method whatsoever .
Glass-ware has now come to resemble rock-crystal in a remarkable manner , but the effect has been to flout the laws of Nature and actually to increase the value of the former without diminishing that of the latter .
SOL The next place among luxuries , although as yet it is fancied only by women , is held by amber .
All the three substances now under discussion enjoy the same prestige as precious stones ; but whereas there are proper reasons for this in the case of the two former substances , since rock-crystal vessels are used for cold drinks and myrrhine-ware for drinks both hot and cold , not even luxury has yet succeeded in inventing a justification for using amber .
SOL Here is an opportunity for exposing the falsehoods of the Greeks .
I only ask my readers to endure these with patience since it is important for mankind just to know that not all that the Greeks have recounted deserves to be admired .
The story how , when Phaethon was struck by the thunderbolt , his sisters through their grief were transformed into poplar trees , and how every year by the banks of the River Eridanus , which we call the Po , they shed tears of amber , known to the Greeks as ' electrum ,' since they call the sun ' Elector ' or ' the Shining One ' — this story has been told by numerous poets , the first of whom , I believe , were Aeschylus , Philoxenus , Euripides , Nicander and Satyrus .
Italy provides clear evidence that this story is false .
More conscientious Greek writers have mentioned islands in the Adriatic named the Electrides , to which , they say , amber is carried along by the Po .
It is quite certain , however , that no islands of this name ever existed there , and indeed that there are no islands so situated as to be within reach of anything carried downstream by the Po .
Incidentally , Aeschylus says that the Eridanus is in Iberia — that is , in Spain — and that it is also called the Rhone , while Euripides and Apollonius , for their part , assert that the Rhone and the Po meet on the coast of the Adriatic .
But such statements only make it easier to pardon their ignorance of amber when their ignorance of geography is so great .
More cautious but equally misguided writers have described how on inaccessible rocks at the head of the Adriatic there stand trees which at the rising of the Dog-star shed this gum .
Theophrastus states that amber is dug up in Liguria , while Chares states that Phaethon died in Ethiopia on an island the Greek name of which is the Isle of Ammon , and that here is his shrine and oracle , and here the source of amber .
Philemon declares that it is a mineral which is dug up in two regions of Scythia , in one of which it is of a white , waxy colour and is called ' electrum ,' while in the other it is tawny and known as ' snaliternicum .
' Demonstratus calls amber ' lyncurium ,' or ' lynx-urine ,' and alleges that it is formed of the urine of the wild beasts known as lynxes , the males producing the kind that is tawny and fiery in colour , and the females , that which is fainter and light in colour .
According to him , others call it ' langurium ' and state that the beasts , which live in Italy , are ' languri .
' Zenothemis calls the same beasts ' langes' and assigns them a habitat on the banks of the Po , while Sudines writes that a tree which produces amber in Liguria is called ' lynx .
' Metrodorus also holds the same opinion .
Sotacus believes that it flows from crags in Britain called the Electrides .
Pytheas speaks of an estuary of the Ocean named Metuonis and extending for 750 miles , the shores of which are inhabited by a German tribe , the Guiones .
From here it is a day 's sail to the Isle of Abalus , to which , he states , amber is carried in spring by currents , being an excretion consisting of solidified brine .
He adds that the inhabitants of the region use it as fuel instead of wood and sell it to the neighbouring Teutones .
His belief is shared by Timaeus , who , however , calls the island Basilia .
Philemon denies the suggestion that amber gives off a flame .
Nicias insists on explaining amber as moisture from the sun 's rays , as follows : he maintains that as the sun sets in the west its rays fall more powerfully upon the earth and leave there a thick exudation , which is later cast ashore in Germany by the tides of the Ocean .
He mentions that amber is formed similarly in Egypt , where it is called ' sacal ,' as well as in India , where the inhabitants find it more agreeable even than frankincense ; and that in Syria the women make whorls of it and call it ' harpax ,' or ' the snatcher ,' because it picks up leaves , straws and the fringes of garments .
Theochrestus holds that it is washed up on the capes of the Pyrenees by the Ocean in turmoil , a view which is shared by Xenocrates , the most recent writer on the subject , who is still living .
Asarubas records that near the Atlantic is a Lake Cephisis , called by the Moors Electrum , which , when thoroughly heated by the sun , produces from its mud amber that floats upon the surface of its waters .
Mnaseas speaks of a district in Africa called Sikyon and of a River Crathis flowing into the Ocean from a lake , on the shores of which live the birds known as Meleager 's Daughters or Penelope Birds .
Here amber is formed in the manner described above .
Theomenes tells us that close to the Greater Syrtes is the Garden of the Hesperides and a pool called Electrum , where there are poplar trees from the tops of which amber falls into the pool , and is gathered by the daughters of Hesperus .
Ctesias states that in India there is a River Hypobarus , a name which indicates that it is the bringer of all blessings .
It flows from the north into the eastern Ocean near a thickly wooded mountain , the trees of which produce amber .
These trees are called ' psitthacorae ,' a word which means ' luscious sweetness .
' Mithridates writes that off the coast of Carmania there is an island called Serita covered with a kind of cedar , from which amber flows down on to the rocks .
Xenocrates asserts that amber in Italy is known not only as ' sucinum ,' but also as ' thium ' ; and in Scythia as ' sacrium ,' for there too it is found .
He states that others suppose that it is produced from mud in Numidia .
But all these authors are surpassed by the tragic poet Sophocles , and this greatly surprises me seeing that his tragedy is so serious and , moreover , his personal reputation in general stands so high , thanks to his noble Athenian lineage , his public achievements and his leadership of an army .
Sophocles tells us how amber is formed in the lands beyond India from the tears shed for Meleager by the birds known as Meleager 's Daughters .
Is it not amazing that he should have held this belief or have hoped to persuade others to accept it ?
Can one imagine , one wonders , a mind so childish and naive as to believe in birds that weep every year or that shed such large tears or that once migrated from Greece , where Meleager died , to the Indies to mourn for him ?
Well then , are there not many other equally fabulous stories told by the poets ?
Yes ; but that anyone should seriously tell such a story regarding such a substance as this , a substance that every day of our lives is imported and floods the market and so confutes the liar , is a gross insult to man 's intelligence and an insufferable abuse of our freedom to utter falsehoods .
SOL It is well established that amber is a product of islands in the Northern Ocean , that it is known to the Germans as ' glaesum ' and that , as a result , one of these islands , the native name of which is Austeravia , was nicknamed by our troops Glaesaria , or Amber Island , when Caesar Germanicus was conducting operations there with his naval squadrons .
To resume , amber is formed of a liquid seeping from the interior of a species of pine , just as the gum in a cherry tree or the resin in a pine bursts forth when the liquid is excessively abundant .
The exudation is hardened by frost or perhaps by moderate heat , or else by the sea , after a spring tide has carded off the pieces from the islands .
At all events , the amber is washed up on the shores of the mainland , being swept along so easily that it seems to hover in the water without settling on the seabed .
Even our forebears believed it to be a ' sucus ,' or exudation , from a tree , and so named it ' sucinum .
' That the tree to which it belongs is a species of pine is shown by the fact that it smells like a pine when it is rubbed , and burns like a pine torch , with the same strongly scented smoke , when it is kindled .
It is conveyed by the Germans mostly into the province of Pannonia .
From there it was first brought into prominence by the Veneti , known to the Greeks as the Enetoi , who are close neighbours of the Pannonians and live around the Adriatic .
The reason for the story associated with the River Po is quite clear , for even today the peasant women of Transpadane Gaul wear pieces of amber as necklaces , chiefly as an adornment , but also because of its medicinal properties .
Amber , indeed , is supposed to be a prophylactic against tonsillitis and other affections of the pharynx , for the water near the Alps has properties that harm the human throat in various ways .
The distance from Carnuntum in Pannonia to the coasts of Germany from which amber is brought to us is some 600 miles , a fact which has been confirmed only recently .
There is still living a Roman knight who was commissioned to procure amber by Julianus when the latter was in charge of a display of gladiators given by the Emperor Nero .
This knight traversed both the trade-route and the coasts , and brought back so plentiful a supply that the nets used for keeping the beasts away from the parapet of the amphitheatre were knotted with pieces of amber .
Moreover , the arms , biers and all the equipment used on one day , the display on each day being varied , had amber fittings .
The heaviest lump that was brought by the knight to Rome weighed 13 pounds .
It is certain that amber is to be found also in India .
Archelaus , who was king of Cappadocia , relates that it is brought from India in the rough state with pine bark adhering to it , and that it is dressed by being boiled in the fat of a sucking-pig .
That amber originates as a liquid exudation is shown by the presence of certain objects , such as ants , gnats and lizards , that are visible inside it .
These must certainly have stuck to the fresh sap and have remained trapped inside it as it hardened .
SOL There are several kinds of amber .
Of these , the pale kind has the finest scent , but , like the waxy kind , it has no value .
The tawny is more valuable ; and still more so if it is transparent , but the colour must not be too fiery : not a fiery glare , but a mere suggestion of it , is what we admire in amber .
The most highly approved specimens are the ' Palernian ,' so called because they recall the colour of the wine : they are transparent and glow gently , so as to have , moreover , the agreeably mellow tint of honey that has been reduced by boiling .
However , it ought to be generally known also that amber can be tinted , as desired , with kid-suet and the root of alkanet .
Indeed , it is now stained even with purple dye .
To resume , when rubbing with the fingers draws forth the hot exhalation , amber attracts straw , dry leaves and linden-bark , just as the magnet attracts iron .
Moreover , amber chippings , when steeped in oil , burn brighter and longer than the pith of flax .
Its rating among luxuries is so high that a human figurine , however small , is more expensive than a number of human beings , alive and in good health ; and as a result it is quite impossible for a single rebuke to suffice .
In the case of Corinthian bronzes , we are attracted by the appearance of the bronze , which is alloyed with gold and silver ; and in the case of chased metalwork , by artistry and inventiveness .
Vessels of fluorspar and rock-crystal have beauties which we have already described .
Pearls can be carded about on the head , and gems on the finger .
In short , every other substance for which we have a weakness pleases us because it lends itself either to display or to practical use , whereas amber gives us only the private satisfaction of knowing that it is a luxury .
Among the other portentous events of his career is the fact that Domitius Nero bestowed this name on the hair of his wife Poppaea , even going so far as to call it in one of his poems ' sucint ' or ' amber-coloured ,' for no defect lacks a term that represents it as an asset .
From that time , respectable women began to aspire to this as a third possible colour for their hair .
SOL However , amber is found to have some use in pharmacy , although it is not for this reason that women like it .
It is of benefit to babies when it is attached to them as an amulet .
Callistratus says that it is good also for people of any age as a remedy for attacks of wild distraction and for strangury , both taken in liquid and worn as an amulet .
This writer also introduces a fresh distinction , giving the name ' chryselectrum ,' or ' gold amber ,' to a kind which is golden in colour and has a most delightful appearance early in the day , but which very easily catches fire and flares up in a moment when it is close to flames .
According to Callistratus , this kind of amber cures fevers and diseases when worn as an amulet on a necklace , affections of the ears when powdered and mixed with honey and rose oil , as well as weak sight if it is powdered and blended with Attic honey , and affections even of the stomach if it is either taken as a fine powder by itself or swallowed in water with mastic .
Amber plays an important part also in the making of artificial transparent gems , particularly artificial amethysts , although , as I have mentioned , it can be dyed any colour .
SOL It is the obstinacy of our authorities that compels me to speak next of lyncurium , since , even when they refrain from asserting that this lyncurium is amber , they still claim that it is a gemstone , stating that it is formed indeed from the urine of the lynx , but also from a particular kind of earth .
They say that the creature , bearing a grudge towards mankind , immediately conceals its urine , which forms a stone in the same place .
The stone is said to have the same fiery colour as amber , to be capable of being engraved and to attract not merely leaves or straws , but also shavings of copper and iron , a belief which even Theophrastus accepts on the authority of a certain Diocles .
I for my part am of the opinion that the whole story is false and that no gemstone bearing this name has been seen in our time .
Also false are the statements made simultaneously about its medical properties , to the effect that when it is taken in liquid it breaks up stone in the bladder , and that it relieves jaundice if it is swallowed in wine or even looked at .
SOL Now I shall discuss those kinds of gemstones that are acknowledged as such , beginning with the finest .
And this shall not be my only aim , but to the greater profit of mankind I shall incidentally confute the abominable falsehoods of the Magi , since in very many of their statements about gems they have gone far beyond providing an alluring substitute for medical science into the realms of the supernatural .
SOL The most highly valued of human possessions , let alone gemstones , is the ' adamas ,' which for long was known only to kings , and to very few of them .
' Adamas' was the name given to the ' knot of gold ' found very occasionally in mines in association with gold and , so it seemed , formed only in gold .
Our ancient authorities thought that it was found only in the mines of Ethiopia between the temple of Mercury and the island of Meroe , and stated that the specimens discovered were no larger than a cucumber seed and not unlike one in colour .
Now , for the first time , as many as six kinds of ' adamas' are recognized .
There is the Indian , which is not formed in gold and has a certain affinity with rock-crystal , which it resembles in respect of its transparency and its smooth faces meeting at six corners .
It tapers to a point in two opposite directions and is all the more remarkable because it is like two whorls joined together at their broadest parts .
It can be as large even as a hazel nut .
Similar to the Indian , only smaller , is the Arabian , which is , moreover , formed under similar conditions .
The rest have a silvery pallor and are liable to be formed only in the midst of the finest gold .
All these stones can be tested upon an anvil , and they are so recalcitrant to blows that an iron hammer head may split in two and even the anvil itself be unseated .
Indeed , the hardness of ' adamas' is indescribable , and so too that property whereby it conquers fire and never becomes heated .
Hence it derives its name , because , according to the meaning of the term in Greek , it is the unconquerable force .
One of these stones is called in Greek ' cenchros ,' or millet seed , and is like a millet seed in size .
A second is known as the Macedonian and is found in the goldmines of Philippi .
This is equal in size to a cucumber seed .
Next comes the so-called Cyprian , which is found in Cyprus and tends towards the colour of copper , but has potent medical properties , which I shall describe later .
After this , there is the ' siderites ,' or ' iron stone ,' which shines like iron and exceeds the rest in weight , but has different properties .
For it can not only be broken by hammering but also be pierced by another ' adamas .
' This can happen also to the Cyprian kind , and , in a word , these stones , being untrue to their kind , possess only the prestige of the name they bear .
Now throughout the whole of this work I have tried to illustrate the agreement and disagreement that exist in Nature , the Greek terms for which are respectively ' sympathia ,' or ' natural affinity ,' and ' antipathia ,' or ' natural aversion .
' Here more clearly than anywhere can these principles be discerned .
For this ' unconquerable force ' that defies Nature 's two most powerful substances , iron and fire , can be broken up by goat 's blood .
But it must be steeped in blood that is fresh and still warm , and even so needs many hammer blows .
Even then , it may break all but the best anvils and iron hammers .
To whose researches or to what accident must we attribute this discovery ?
What inference could have led anyone to use the foulest of creatures for testing a priceless substance such as this ?
Surely it is to divinities that we must attribute such inventions and all such benefits .
We must not expect to find reason anywhere in Nature , but only the evidence of will !
When an ' adamas' is successfully broken it disintegrates into splinters so small as to be scarcely visible .
These are much sought after by engravers of gems and are inserted by them into iron tools because they make hollows in the hardest materials without difficulty .
The ' adamas' has so strong an aversion to the magnet that when it is placed close to the iron it prevents the iron from being attracted away from itself .
Or again , if the magnet is moved towards the iron and seizes it , the ' adamas' snatches the iron and takes it away .
' Adamas' prevails also over poisons and renders them powerless , dispels attacks of wild distraction and drives groundless fears from the mind .
For this reason the Greeks sometimes call it ' anancites ,' or ' compulsive .
' Metrodorus of Scepsis is alone , so far as I know from my own reading , in stating that ' adamas' is found likewise in Germany , namely on the island of Basilia , which also produces amber , and in preferring this ' adamas' to that of Arabia .
There can be no doubt that this statement is untrue .
SOL Next in value in our estimation come the pearls of India and Arabia , which we discussed in Book 9 [ 106 ] among the products of the sea .
The third rank among gemstones is assigned for several reasons to the ' smaragdus .
' Certainly , no colour has a more pleasing appearance .
For although we gaze eagerly at young plants and at leaves , we look at ' smaragdi ' with all the more pleasure because , compared with them , there is nothing whatsoever that is more intensely green .
Moreover , they alone of gems , when we look at them intently , satisfy the eye without cloying it .
Indeed , even after straining our sight by looking at another object , we can restore it to its normal state by looking at a ' smaragdus ' ; and engravers of gemstones find that this is the most agreeable means of refreshing theft eyes : so soothing to their feeling of fatigue is the mellow green colour of the stone .
Apart from this property , ' smaragdi ' appear larger when they are viewed at a distance because they reflect their colour upon the air around them ?
They remain the same in sunlight , shadow or lamplight , always shining gently and allowing the vision to penetrate to their further extremity owing to the ease with which light passes through them , a property that pleases us also in respect of water .
' Smaragdi ' are generally concave in shape , so that they concentrate the vision .
Because of these properties , mankind has decreed that ' smaragdi ' must be preserved in their natural state and has forbidden them to be engraved .
In any case , those of Scythia and Egypt are so hard as to be unaffected by blows .
When ' smaragdi ' that are tabular in shape are laid flat , they reflect objects just as mirrors do .
The Emperor Nero used to watch the fights between gladiators in a reflecting ' smaragdus .
' SOL There are twelve kinds of ' smaragdus .
' The most notable is the Scythian , so called from the nation in whose territory it is found .
No kind is deeper in colour or more free from defects : it differs as widely in quality from the other ' smaragdi ' as they from the other gems .
Next to this in esteem , as also in locality , is the Bactrian .
These stones are said to be gathered by the natives in the fissures of rocks when the Etesians blow .
For at this season the ground is uncovered and the stones glitter here and there because the sands of the desert are shifted violently by these winds .
These stones , however , are said to be much smaller than the Scythian .
Third in order come those of Egypt , which are dug near Coptos , a city of the Thebaid , from mines in the hills .
SOL The other kinds are found in copper-mines , and so the first place among them is held by the stones of Cyprus .
Their special asset is their colour , which is limpid without being at all faint .
On the contrary , it combines body and clarity , and , wherever one peers through the stones , reproduces the transparency of seawater , the stones being in an equal degree translucent and brilliant .
In other words , they dissipate their colour and also allow the sight to penetrate within .
There is a story that in this island there stood on the burial-mound of a prince named Hermias , not far from the tunny-fisheries , the marble statue of a lion , into which had been inserted eyes made of ' smaragdus ' ; and these , it is said , blazed so brightly , even far below the surface of the sea , that the tunnies fled in tenor , and the fishermen were long puzzled by this strange behaviour until finally they changed the gemstones in the eye-sockets .
SOL But since high prices are so freely paid for these stones , it is only right that we should point out their defects , some of which are common to every kind , while others are regional peculiarities , as with human beings .
Thus the Cyprian stones show various shades of sea-green , and these may be more or less intense in different parts of the same ' smaragdus ,' so that the stones do not always maintain the familiar uniform deep colour of the Scythian variety .
Moreover , some stones are traversed by a ' shadow ' ; this makes the colour dull , and the fainter the colour , the more serious the defect .
In accordance with these defects , ' smaragdi ' are divided into classes , some , which are called ' blind ,' being opaque , while others , instead of being transparent to translucent , are sub-opaque .
Some again are variegated , and some enveloped in a ' cloud .
' This differs from the ' shadow ' mentioned above .
' Cloud ' is a defect belonging to a stone with a whitish hue in it , when the green appearance does not pervade the whole stone , but the vision is either blocked beneath the surface or intercepted at the surface by this white inclusion .
Filaments , specks like salt and inclusions resembling lead are also defects ; and these are common to nearly all varieties .
SOL Next in esteem to the Cyprian ' smaragdi ' come the Ethiopian , which , according to Juba , are found at a distance of twenty-five days' journeying from Coptos , and are bright green , although they are rarely flawless or uniform in Democritus includes in this class the Thermiaean and Persian stones !
He states that the former are massive and convex , while the Persian stones , although they are not transparent , satisfy the eye with their agreeably uniform colour without allowing it to see within .
He compares them to the eyes of cats and leopards , which likewise shine without being transparent , and mentions , moreover , that the stones are dimmed in sunlight , glisten in shadow and shine farther than other stones .
All these varieties have a further defect in that their colour may be that of gall or rancid oil , so that they may be bright and clear , and yet not green .
These faults are particularly noticeable in the Attic stones found in the silver-mines at a place called Thoricus .
They are always less massive than the others , but are more handsome when seen at a distance .
These stones too are often marred by lead-like inclusions , as a result of which they resemble lead when they are seen in sunlight .
One peculiarity is that some of these stones show the effects of age as their green colour gradually fades away and , moreover , are damaged by exposure to the sun .
After these come the Median stones , which show a great variety of tints and on occasion are even blended to some extent with lapis lazuli .
These stones have undulating bands and contain inclusions resembling various objects , for example , poppy heads , birds , the young of animals or feathers .
Such stones , in spite of their varied colours , seem to be green by nature , since they may be improved by being steeped in oil and there is no variety that displays larger specimens .
The ' smaragdi ' of Chalcedon have perhaps completely disappeared now that the copper-mines in the district have failed ; and , in any case , they were always worthless and very small .
Moreover , they were brittle and of a nondescript colour , this being more or less bright according to the angle at which it was viewed , like the green feathers in a peacock 's tail or on a pigeon 's neck .
Furthermore , they were marked with veins and were scaly .
They had also a characteristic defect called ' sarcion ,' that is a kind of fleshy growth on the stone .
There is a mountain known as Smaragdites , or Emerald Mountain , near Chalcedon , on which they used to be gathered .
Juba states that a ' smaragdus' known as ' chlora ,' or ' green stone ,' is used as an inlay in decorating houses in Arabia ; and likewise the stone which the Egyptians call ' alabastrites .
' Several of our most recent authorities mention not only Laconian ' smaragdi ,' which are dug on Mount Taygetus and resemble the Median variety , but also others that are found in Sicily .
SOL Among the ' smaragdi ' we include also a gem that comes from Persia known as the ' tanos ,' which is of an ugly shade of green and is full of flaws within and another from Cyprus , the ' chalcosmaragdna ,' or ' copper smaragdus ,' which is clouded by veins resembling copper .
Theophrastus records that in Egyptian records are to be found statements to the effect that to one of the kings a king of Babylon once sent as a gift a ' smaragdus' measuring four cubits in length and three in breadth ; and that there existed in Egypt in a temple of Jupiter an obelisk made of four ' smaragdi ' and measuring forty cubits in height and four cubits in breadth at one extremity and two at the other .
He states , moreover , that at the time when he was writing there existed in the temple of Hercules at Tyre a large square pillar of ' smaragdus ,' unless this was rather to be regarded as a ' false smaragdus ' ; for , according to him , this is another variety that is found .
SOL He mentions also that there was once discovered in Cyprus a stone of which half was a ' smaragdus' and half an ' iaspis ,' because the liquid matter had not yet been completely transformed .
Apion , surnamed Plistonices , or ' the Cantankerous ,' has lately left on record the statement that there still exists in the Egyptian labyrinth a large statue of Serapis , nine cubits high , made of ' smaragdus .
' SOL Many people consider the nature of beryls to be similar to , if not identical with , that of emeralds .
Beryls are produced in India and are rarely found elsewhere .
All of them are cut by skilled craftsmen to a smooth hexagonal shape since their colour , which is deadened by the dullness of an unbroken surface , is enhanced by the reflection from the facets .
If they are cut in any other way they lack brilliance .
The most highly esteemed beryls are those that reproduce the pure green of the sea , while next in value are the so-called ' chrysoberyls .
' These are slightly paler , but have a vivid colour approaching that of gold .
A variety closely akin to these , but still a little paler and by some regarded as a special kind is the so-called ' chrysoprasus .
' Fourth in order are reckoned the ' hyacinthizontes ,' or ' sapphire-blue beryls ,' and fifth the so-called ' aeroides ,' or ' sky-blue ' variety .
After these come the ' waxy ' and then the ' oily ' beryls , that is , beryls coloured like olive oil .
Finally , there are those that resemble rock-crystal .
These beryls generally contain filaments and impurities , and besides are faint in colour ; and all these features like are defects .
The Indians are extraordinarily fond of elongated beryls and claim that they are the only precious stones that are preferably left without a gold setting .
Consequently , they pierce them and string them on elephants' bristles .
They are all agreed that a stone of perfect quality should not be pierced , and in this case they merely enclose the head of the stone in a convex gold cap .
They prefer to shape beryls into long prisms rather than into gems simply because length is their most attractive feature .
Some people are of the opinion that they are formed from the very start as prisms and also that their appearance is improved by perforation , when a white cloudy core is removed and there is , in addition , the reflection from the gold or , in any case , the thickness of the material through which the light must penetrate is reduced .
Besides those already mentioned , beryls show the same defects as ' smaragdi ,' and also spots like whitlows .
In our part of the world beryls , it is thought , are sometimes found in the neighbourhood of the Black Sea .
The Indians have found a way of counterfeiting various precious stones , and beryls in particulars by staining rock-crystal .
SOL Beryls differ very little , and also very considerably , from opals , stones which yield precedence only to the ' smaragdus .
' India , likewise , is the sole producer of these stones and combining , as they do , the brilliant qualities of the most valuable gems , they above all others description .
They display the more subtle fires of the ' carbunculus ,' the flashing purple of the amethyst and the sea-green tint of the ' smaragdus ,' all combined together in incredible brilliance .
For some people the vivid colours resemble in their general effect the pigment known as azurite ; for others , the flames from burning sulphur or from a fire that has been kindled with olive oil .
The size of the stone is that of a hazel nut .
Even among us history makes it famous , since there still exists even today a precious stone of this variety which caused Antony to outlaw a senator , Nonius , the son of the Nonius Struma who made the poet Catullus so indignant when he saw him seated in the magistrate 's chair , and the grandfather of Servilius Nonianus , who was consul in my time .
This Nonius , when outlawed , fled , taking with him this ring alone of all his many possessions .
There is no doubt that at that time the value of the ring was 2,000,000 sesterces ; but how amazing was Antony 's savagery and extravagant caprice in outlawing a man for the sake of a gemstone , and , equally , how extraordinary was the obstinacy of Nonius in clinging to his ' doom ,' when even wild creatures are believed to buy their safety by biting off the member which , as they know , endangers their lives , and leaving it behind for their pursuers !
SOL The defects of the opal are a colour tending towards that of the flower of the plant called heliotrope , or of rock-crystal or hail , as well as the occurrence of salt-like specks or rough places or dots that distract the eye .
There is no stone which is harder to distinguish from the original when it is counterfeited , in glass by a cunning craftsman .
The only test is by sunlight .
When a false opal is held steadily between the thumb and finger against the rays of the sun there shines through the stone one unchanging colour which is spent at its source , whereas the radiance of the genuine stone continually changes and at different times scatters its colours more intensely from different parts of the stone , shedding a bright light on the fingers where it is held .
Owing to its exceptional beauty , this stone is commonly known by the Greek term ' paederos ,' or ' Favourite ,' but those who regard the ' paederos' as a separate variety a say that the Indian name for it is ' sangenon .
' The ' paederos' is said to be found in Egypt and Arabia , in Pontus , where the quality is very poor , and also in Galatia , Thasos and Cyprus .
Exceptional specimens of these latter stones have the charm of an opal , but they shine more softly and rarely lack roughness .
The dominant colour of the ' paederos' is a mixture of sky-blue and purple , and the green of the ' smaragdus' is absent .
Those in which the brilliance is darkened by the colour of wine are superior to those in which it is diluted with a watery tint .
SOL Up to this point there is agreement as to which stones are supreme , the question having been largely settled by a decree of our Women-councillors of State .
There is less certainty regarding the stones about which men too pass judgement .
In the case of men , it is an individual 's caprice that sets a value upon an individual stone , and , above all , the rivalry that ensues .
A case in point is that of the Emperor Claudius , when he took to wearing a ' smaragdus' or a sardonyx .
But according to Demostratus , the first Roman to adopt a sardonyx was the elder Africanus , and hence arose the esteem which this gemstone enjoys at Rome .
And so it is to this stone that I shall award the next place after the opal .
SOL Formerly , as is clear from the very name , sardonyx meant a stone with a layer of carnelian resting on a layer of white , that is , like flesh superimposed on a human fingernail , both parts of the stone being translucent .
Such is the character of the Indian sardonyx according to Ismenias , Demostratus , Zenothemis and Sotacus .
The last two writers call such other varieties of the stone as are opaque ' blind sardonyx .
' Those stones that have now usurped the name although they lack all trace of the carncian of the Indian stones come from Arabia ; and the sardonyx has come to be recognized in the guise of several colours , the base being black or else having the colour of azurite , while the ' nail ' above is coloured vermilion and is banded with a thick white line , not without a suggestion of purple where the white shades into vermilion .
Zenothemis writes that the sardonyx was not held in high regard by the Indians , though it might be actually large enough to be commonly made into sword hilts .
Indeed , as is generally known , in India the stone is exposed to view by the mountain streams .
He states that in our part of the world , however , the sardonyx was popular from the beginning because it was almost the only gemstone which , when engraved as a signet , did not carry away the sealing wax with it .
Later we persuaded the Indians to share our appreciation of it .
There the common folk wear it pierced on a necklace ; and this perforation is now a proof of Indian origin .
The Arabian stones are remarkable for their whiteness , the band being brilliant and quite thick : it does not glimmer in the depths of the stone or on its sloping side , but shines on the convex surface of the gem and is , moreover , set off by a lower layer of the deepest black .
In the Indian stones we find that this layer has the colour of azure or horn .
Moreover , their white band can have a kind of iridescent shimmer , while the surface is red like the shell of a crawfish .
Incidentally , if the stones are coloured like honey or wine lees ( the latter term in itself implying a defect ) they are condemned ; and again , also , if the white band is blurred instead of being defined , and similarly if it contains an intrusive patch of some other colour .
For no colour must be broken by another in its own layer .
There is also an Armenian sardonyx which is acceptable in every respect apart from the faintness of its ( white ) band .
SOL I must describe too the character of the onyx proper , which shares its name with the sardonyx .
Elsewhere , this name is given to a stone , but here it is that of a gem .
Sudines states that in onyx one finds a white band resembling a human fingernail , as well as the colour of the ' chrysolith ,' the sard and the iaspis , while Zenothemis mentions that the Indian onyx has several different colours , fiery red , black and that of horn , surrounded by a white layer as in an eye , and in some cases traversed by a slanting layer .
Sotacus records also an Arabian onyx which differs from the Indian in that the latter displays a small fiery red layer surrounded by one or more white bands ( the arrangement being unlike that of the Indian sardonyx , where the top red layer is a circle , and not , as in this instance , a dot ) .
On the other hand , the Arabian onyx , according to him , is found to be black with white bands .
Satyrus states that there is an Indian onyx that is flesh-coloured , with a part of it resembling the ' carbunculus ,' and a part , the ' chrysolith ' and the amethyst .
This kind he wholly rejects as spurious , asserting that a genuine onyx has several bands of different colours combined with others that are milk-white , the colours as the bands shade into each other being quite indescribable as they are reduced to a harmonious and delightfully agreeable unity .
SOL We must not , however , postpone too long our discussion of the sard , which is similarly a separate component of the name it shares with the onyx ; and as we make our way to this topic , we must describe the properties of all the other fiery red gemstones .
SOL The first rank among these is held by ' carbunculi ,' so-called because of their fiery appearance , although they are not affected by fire and are therefore sometimes known as ' acaustoe ,' or ' incombustible ' stones .
Two kinds of ' carbunculi ' are the Indian and the Garamantic : the latter was called in Greek the Carthaginian because it was associated with the wealth of Great Carthage .
To these varieties are added the Ethiopian and that of Alabanda , the latter being found , it is said , at Orthosia in Caria , but treated at Alabanda .
Furthermore , in each variety there are so-called ' male ' and ' female ' stones , of which the former are the more brilliant , while the latter have a weaker lustre .
SOL Among the male stones , moreover , are to be observed some that are clearer than usual or of an unusually dark red glare , and some that shine from deep beneath their surface and blaze with exceptional brilliance in sunlight , while the best are the ' amethyst-coloured stones ,' namely those in which the fiery red shade passes at the edge into amethyst-violet , and the next best , known as ' Syrtitae ,' or ' Stones of Syrtis ,' have a bright feathery lustre .
All these stones are said to reveal themselves in ground where sunlight is reflected most powerfully .
Satyrus asserts that Indian ' carbunculi ' lack brilliance and look generally flawed , with a ' parched ' lustre ; and that the Ethiopian stones look greasy and shed no lustre at all , but burn with a fire that is compressed within them .
Callistratus holds that a ' carbunculus' ought to east a brilliant , colourless refulgence , so that when placed on a surface it enhances the lustre of other stones that are clouded at the edges , thanks to its own glowing brilliance .
Hence many people call such a stone the white ' carbunculus ,' and the kind that shines more faintly the ' lignyzon ,' or ' murky ' stone .
Callistratus adds that Carthaginian ' carbunculi ' are much smaller than others , and that the Indian stones can be hollowed into vessels holding as much as a pint .
Archelaus writes that the Carthaginian stones have a somewhat swarthy appearance , but light up more intensely than the rest when they are viewed by firelight or sunlight , and at an angle .
He mentions also that they appear purple indoors in shadow , and flame-red in the open air ; that they sparkle when they are held against the sun , and that , when they are used as signets , they melt the wax , even in a very dark place .
Many writers state that the Indian stones arc brighter than the Carthaginian , and that conversely they become dull when viewed at an angle .
They add that the male Carthaginian stones have a blazing star inside them , while the female stones shed all their radiance externally ; and that the ' carbunculi ' of Alabanda are darker than the rest , and rough .
Around Miletus also , the earth produces stones of the same colour , which are not at all affected by fire .
Theophrastus assures us that ' carbunculi ' are found both at Orchomenos in Arcadia and in Chios , the former , of which mirrors are made , being the darker .
According to him , there are variegated stones , interspersed with white spots , from Troezen , and likewise from Corinth although the white in these Corinthian stones is yellowish .
He mentions that ' carbuneuli ' are imported also from Marseilles .
Bocchus writes that they are dug up too in the neighbourhood of Olisipo , but only with great difficulty , because the soil , which is clay , is baked hard by the sun .
SOL Nothing is harder than the attempt to distinguish the varieties of this stone , so great is the scope that they afford for the exercise of cunning , when craftsmen force the opaque stones to become translucent by placing foil beneath them .
The duller stones , it is said , when steeped in vinegar for fourteen days shine with a lustre that persists for as many months .
' Carbunculi ' are counterfeited very realistically in glass , but , as with other gems , the false ones can be detected on a grindstone , for their substance is softer and brittle .
Artificial stones containing cores are detected by using grindstones and scales , stones made of glass paste being less heavy .
On occasion , moreover , they contain small globules which shine like silver .
SOL There is also a stone called ' anthracitis ,' which is dug up in Thesprotia and resembles charcoal .
Statements that it is found in Liguria I consider to be false , unless it is a fact that it was found there when the statements were made .
Among these stones there are said to be some that are surrounded by a white vein .
The ' anthracitis' has the fiery colour of the stones previously mentioned , but it possesses one peculiar property : when it is touched its glow dies away and disappears , but when , on the other hand , it is soaked with water it blazes forth again .
SOL A stone that is closely akin to ' carbonculi ' is the ' sandastros ,' sometimes known also as the Garamantic stone in virtue of its character .
It occurs in a part of India that hears the same name , and is found also in Southern Arabia .
Its chief merit is that its fiery brilliance , displayed , as it were , in a transparent casing , glitters with golden particles that shine like stars within the stone , and always inside its structure and never upon its surface .
Furthermore , there are religious associations attached to these stones , and we are told of their affinity with the stars , which exists because the starry particles with which they are embellished generally conform in their numbers and arrangement to the constellations of the Pleiades and Hyades .
For this reason , they are regarded by astrologers as ritual objects .
Here too , the male stones may be distinguished by their deep colour and by a certain vitality , which imparts a tint to objects placed close to them .
The Indian stones , it is said , even weaken the sight .
The fire of the female stones is more mellow , and glows rather than kindles .
Some prefer the Arabian stones to the Indian , and compare the former to the smoky ' chrysolithus .
' Ismenias declares that because of its softness the ' sandastros' cannot be polished , and so fails to fetch a high price .
Some people call the stone ' sandrisites .
' What is universally agreed is that , the larger the number of starry particles , the higher the price .
Sometimes misunderstanding is caused by the similarity of the term ' sandaresus ,' applied to a stone which Nicander calls ' sandaserion ' and others ' sandaresos ,' although there are certain writers who actually call this stone ' sandastros ,' and our former stone ' sandaresus .
' This latter stone likewise is found in India and preserves the name of its place of origin .
Its colour is that of a green apple or green oil , and it is generally despised !
SOL To the same class of fiery red stones belongs the ' lychnis ,' so called from the kindling of lamps , because at that time it is exceptionally beautiful .
It is found around Orthosia and throughout Caria and the neighbouring regions , but occurs at its finest in India .
' Mild carbuncle ' is the term sometimes applied to ' lychnis' of the second grade resembling the so-called ' Flower of Jove .
' I find that there are other varieties as well , one of which has a purple and the other a scarlet sheen !
These , when heated in the sun or by being rubbed between the fingers , are said to attract straws and papyrus fibres .
SOL It is said that the same power is exerted by the Carthaginian stone , although it is far less valuable than those previously mentioned .
It is formed in the mountain country of the Nasamones by rains of divine origin , as the inhabitants like to think .
The stones are found when they reflect the moonlight , particularly at full moon , and in former times were exported to Carthage .
Archelaus records that brittle stones , full of veins and resembling a dying ember , are found in Egypt near Thebes .
I find that drinking vessels used commonly to be made from this stone and from ' lychnis .
' All these varieties , however , obstinately resist engraving and , when used as signets , retain a portion of the wax .
SOL On the contrary , sard , which shares a part of its name with sardonyx , is extremely useful for this purpose .
The stone itself is a common one and was first discovered at Sardis , but the most valuable specimens are found near Babylon .
When certain quarries are being opened up the stones come to light adhering to the rock like heart-wood .
This mineral is said to be now exhausted in Persia , but sards are found in several other localities , for example in Paros and at Assos .
In India it occurs in three varieties : there are red stones , those known as ' pioniae ,' or ' fatty stones ,' because of their greasy lustre , and finally a third kind that is backed with silver foil .
The Indian stones are translucent , whereas the Arabian are somewhat opaque .
Others are found also in Epirus near Leucas and in Egypt ; and these are backed with gold foil .
Among sards too there are male and female stones , of which the former shine the more intensely , while the latter are less lively and have a duller lustre .
In ancient times no gemstone was more commonly used than the sard — this , at any rate , is the gem that is flaunted in the plays of Menander and Philemon — and no other translucent gems lose their lustre less readily when they are covered with moisture : olive oil affects them more than any other liquid .
Of these stones , the honey-coloured meet with disapproval , which is even stronger in the case of those that look like earthenware .
SOL Peridot still preserves its special reputation .
It is a greenish variety of its own and , when first discovered , was preferred to any other .
Once some Troglodytes , or Cave-dwellers , who were pirates , came ashore , exhausted by hunger and stormy weather , on an Arabian island , the name of which was Cytis ; and it so happened that , while they were digging up plants and roots , they unearthed a peridot .
This , at least , is the account accepted by Archelaus .
Juba states that Topazos is the name of an island situated in the Red Sea at a distance of some 35 miles from the mainland .
According to him , the island is fog-bound : consequently sailors often have to search for it , and this is why it has acquired its name ; for in the Troglodyte language topazin means ' to seek .
' Juba records that the stone was first brought from here as a gift for Queen Berenice , the mother of Ptolemy the Second , by his governor [ 285-246 B.C .
] Philo ; and that , because the king greatly admired it , a statue 4 cubits high was later made of peridot in honour of this Ptolemy 's wife , Arsinoe , and consecrated in the shrine which was named after her the Arsinoeum .
Our most recent authorities assert that the stone is found also near Alabastrum , a town in the Thebaid , and divide it into two varieties , the ' prasoides ,' or ' leek-like ,' and the ' chrysopteros ,' or ' golden-feathered ,' of which the latter resembles the ' chrysoprasus .
' In general , the colour tends to resemble the tints of the leek .
Incidentally , the peridot is the largest of gemstones .
Also , it is the only precious stone that is affected by an iron file , whereas all others have to be smoothed with Naxian stone and emery .
Moreover , peridot is worn away by use .
SOL With this stone is associated , but more closely in respect of similarity in appearance than of esteem , the pale-green ' callaina .
' It occurs in the hinterland beyond India among the inhabitants of the Caucasus , the Hyrcani , Sacae and Dahae .
It is of exceptional size , but is porous and full of flaws .
A far purer and finer stone is found in Cannania .
In both localities , however , ' callaina ' occurs amidst inaccessible icy crags , where it is seen as an eye-shaped swelling loosely adhering to the rocks , as though it had been attached to them , rather than formed upon them .
Thus tribes accustomed to riding on horseback and too lazy to use their feet find it irksome to climb in search of the stones ; and they are also deterred by the risks .
They , therefore , shoot at them from a distance with their slings and dislodge them , moss and all .
This is the article that pays their taxes , this they acknowledge to be the most beautiful thing that can be worn on neck or fingers , from this they derive their wealth , this is their pride and joy as they boast of the number that they have shot down since their childhood , an operation in which success varies , seeing that some win fine stones with their first shot , while many reach old age without obtaining one .
Such , then , is the way in which they hunt the ' callaina .
' Subsequently , the stone is shaped by the drill , being in other respects an easy stone to deal with .
The best stones have the colour of ' smaragdus ,' so that it is obvious , after all , that their attractiveness is not their own .
They are enhanced by being set in gold , and no gem sets off gold so well .
The finer specimens lose their colour if they are touched by oil , unguents or even undiluted wine , whereas the less valuable ones preserve it more steadfastly .
No gemstone is more easily counterfeited by means of imitations in glass .
Some authorities say that ' callainae ' are found in Arabia inside the nests of the birds known as ' melancoryphi ,' or ' black caps .
' SOL There are also many other kinds of green stones .
A member of the commoner class is the prase .
A second variety of this stone differs in respect of its blood-red spots , and a third , because it is sharply marked with three white streaks .
Preference , however is given to the ' chrysoprasus ,' or ' golden prase ,' which likewise reproduces the tint of a leek , although in this case the tint veers slightly from that of peridot towards gold .
This stone , moreover , may be large enough to be made even into small cups , and it is very commonly cut into cylinders .
SOL India produces not only these stones , but also the ' nilios ,' which differs from the ' chrysoprasus' in showing a weak lustre and one that is elusive when it is looked at closely .
Sudines states that it is found also in the Siberus , a river in Attica .
Its colour is that of smoky , or on occasion honey-coloured , peridot .
Juba records that the stone is formed on the banks of the river known to us as the Nile , from which its name , according to him , is derived .
SOL Malachite is an opaque stone of a rather deep green shade and owes its name to its colour , which is that of the mallow .
It is warmly recommended because it makes an accurate impression as a signet , protects children , and has a natural property that is a prophylactic against danger .
SOL A green stone that is often translucent is the ' iaspis ,' which still preserves the reputation that it enjoyed in the past , even though it now yields to many others .
Numerous countries produce it .
India produces a variety resembling ' smaragdus ,' Cyprus one that is hard and dull greyish-green in colour , and Persia one that is like the blue sky and is therefore called ' aeizusa ,' or ' sky-blue .
' A similar kind comes from the Caspian region .
A deep-blue variety is found near the River Thermodon in Phrygia a purple one , and in Cappadocia another that is purplish-blue , sombre and without lustre .
From Amisos comes a kind similar to the Indian , and from Chalcedon one that is cloudy .
But it is not so important to distinguish countries of origin as excellences .
The best stone is that which has a shade of purple , the next has one of rose , and the next again of ' smaragdus .
' The Greeks have applied epithets to each kind in accordance with its character .
The fourth variety is known among them as ' boria ,' or ' north-wind iaspis ,' because it is like the sky on an autumn morning .
This will be identical with the kind that is called ' aerizusa .
' There is also the ' terebinthizusa ,' or ' turpentine iaspis ,' the epithet being inappropriate , in my opinion , because the stone is , as it were , compounded of many gems of the same variety , for it is not only like a sard , but also resembles in its colour a violet .
There are just as many kinds that remain to be described , but all are blue to a fault , or else are like rock-crystal or a sebesten plum .
Consequently the better specimens are set in an open bezel so that they may remain exposed on both faces , with only their edges clasped by the gold .
A defect found in them is their weak lustre and failure to shine at a distance , and also specks resembling salt , as well as all the faults that occur in other gemstones .
They too can be counterfeited in glass , and the deception becomes obvious when the brightness of a stone is scattered abroad instead of being concentrated within .
The remaining varieties are called ' sphragides ,' or ' signets ,' the common Greek name for a gemstone being thus bestowed on these alone because they are excellent for sealing documents .
However , all the peoples of the East are said to wear them as amulets .
That variety of ' iaspis' which resembles ' smaragdus' is often surrounded in the middle by a slanting white line , and is therefore called ' monogrammos ,' or ' single-lined ' : if there are several such lines the stone is ' polygrammos ,' or ' many-lined .
' In passing , it gives me pleasure to refute here , as elsewhere , the falsehoods of the Magi , who tell us that this stone is helpful to public speakers .
There is also an ' iaspis' combined with onyx known as ' iasponyx ,' or ' jasper onyx ,' a stone that has a cloudy inclusion in it and specks on it that look like snow , and is spangled with red dots .
There is also an ' iaspis' that resembles Megarian salt and is stained as though with smoke : hence it is called ' capnias ,' or ' smoky .
' I myself have seen a figure , representing Nero in a breastplate , that was made of this stone and was 16 inches high .
SOL We shall now give a separate account of ' cyanus ,' for a short time ago we applied this name to an ' iaspis' owing to its blue colour .
The best kind is the Scythian , then comes the Cyprian and lastly there is the Egyptian .
It is very commonly counterfeited by tinting other stones , and this is a famous achievement of the kings of Egypt , whose records also mention the name of the king who first tinted stones in this way ' Cyanus ,' too , is divided into male and female varieties .
Sometimes inside cyanus there is a golden dust , which , however , differs from that which occurs inside lapis lazuli ; for there the gold glistens as dots .
SOL Lapis lazuli also is blue and is only rarely tinged with purple .
The best is found in Persia , but nowhere are there any transparent stones .
Moreover , they are useless for engraving , because cores like rock-crystal interfere with this .
Lapis lazuli which is of the colour of azurite is regarded as a male variety .
SOL Next , we shall assign to another category purple stones or those varieties that deviate from them .
Here the first rank is held by the amethysts of India , although amethysts are found also in that part of Arabia , known as Petra , which borders on Syria , as well as in Lesser Armenia , Egypt and Galatia , while the most imperfect and worthless specimens occur in Thasos and Cyprus .
The name ' amethyst ' has been explained by the supposed fact that the brilliant colour of the stone closely approaches that of wine , but stops short of absorbing it and ends in a violet shade .
Others , again , offer the explanation that the characteristic purple colour contains an element that is not quite bright red , but fades into the colour of wine .
However this may be , all amethysts are transparent and are of a handsome violent tint , and all are easy to engrave .
The Indian amethyst has the perfect shade of Tyrian purple at its best , and it is this stone that the dye-factories aspire to emulate .
The stone , when examined , sheds a gentle , mellow colour , which does not , like that of the ' carbunculus ,' dazzle the eye .
A second kind of amethyst deviates towards the sapphire .
Its colour is known to the Indians as ' soeos ,' and the variety of gem as ' soeondios .
' A fainter variety of the same stone is called ' sapenos' and also , in the districts adjacent to Arabia , ' pharanitis' after the name of a tribe .
A fourth kind has the colour of red wine , while a fifth degenerates nearly into rock-crystal , since its purple fades away towards colourlessness .
This is the least valuable kind , since a fine stone should , when held up to the light , display in its purple colour a rosy tint shining forth gently as though from a ' carbuneulus .
' Some people prefer to call such stones ' paederotes ,' or ' favourites ,' others ' anterotes ,' or ' love requited ,' and many ' eyelid of Venus .
' The Magi falsely claim that the amethyst prevents drunkenness , and that it is this property that has given it its name .
Moreover , they say that , if amethysts are inscribed with the names of the sun and moon and are worn hanging from the neck along with baboons' hairs and swallows' feathers , they are a protection against spells .
Again , they assert that , however they are used , amethysts will assist people who are about to approach a king as suppliants , and that they keep off hail and locusts if they are used in conjunction with an incantation which they prescribe .
Moreover , they have made similar claims on behalf of the ' smaragdus ,' provided that it is engraved with an eagle or a scarab beetle .
I can only suppose that in committing these statements to writing they express a derisive contempt for mankind .
SOL There is a considerable difference between the amethyst and the ' hyacinthus ,' which , however , shows only a slight deviation from a closely related tint .
The difference lies in the fact that the brilliant violet radiance that is characteristic of the amethyst is here diluted with the tint of the hyacinth flower ; and although at first sight the colour is agreeable , it loses its power before we can take our fill of it and , indeed , is so far from satisfying the eye that it almost fails to strike it and droops more rapidly than the flower of the same name .
SOL Besides the ' hyacinthus ,' the ' chrysolithus ,' a bright golden , transparent stone , comes to us from Ethiopia .
Preference over this variety , however , goes to the Indian and , if the colour is uniform , to the Tibarene stones !
The worst stones are the Arabian , for these are murky and mottled , with their brilliance broken up by cloudy spots .
Even the clear stones that have come to light are full of a kind of powder .
The best specimens are those which , placed alongside gold , make it assume a white , silvery appearance .
These stones are set in an open bezel so as to remain fully transparent , while the rest are backed with brass foil .
SOL Although they have now ceased to be used as gems , there are certain stones to be mentioned that are called ' chrysoelectri ,' or ' golden amber .
' Their colour passes into that of amber , but only in morning light .
Those from Pontus are betrayed by their light weight .
Some of these stones are hard and reddish , while some are soft and full of flaws .
Bocchus assures us that they have been found also in Spain , in the place where , according to his previous account , rock-crystal is dug up from shafts sunk to water-level , and adds that he saw a ' chrysolithus' weighing twelve pounds .
SOL There occur also ' leucochrysi ,' or ' golden-white ' stones , which are traversed by a bright white vein ; and there is also the ' capnias ,' or ' smoky stone ' belonging to this class .
There are , moreover , stones closely resembling those made of glass-paste , their colour being a kind of bright saffron-yellow .
They can be so convincingly counterfeited in glass that the difference cannot be observed , although it may be detected by touch , since the glass-paste feels warmer .
SOL In the same class is the ' melichrysus ,' or ' honey-gold stone ,' which looks like pure honey seen through a clear film of gold .
This stone , a product of India , is brittle , although hard , but is by no means unpleasing .
India produces also the ' xuthos' or ' brownish-yellow stone ,' a gem regarded there as fit only for the common folk .
SOL White stones are headed by the ' paederos ,' or ' favourite ,' although we may ask to which colour we should assign a stone bearing a name that is so often bandied about among beautiful objects of different kinds a that the mere term has become a guarantee of beauty .
However , the species which the name claims as its very own likewise fulfils our great expectations .
Here , indeed , with the transparency of the rock-crystal are associated a characteristic sky-green tint , along with a brilliant glint of purple and of golden wine , of which the last colour is always the last to be seen , but always has a purple halo .
All these colours , both individually and collectively , seem to pervade the stone ; and there is no gemstone that can match its clarity , which is delightfully agreeable to the eye .
The most highly valued kind is found in India , where it is known as ' sangenon ,' while the second-best occurs in Egypt , where the name used is ' tenites .
' Third in order is a variety found in Arabia , but this kind is rough .
Then there is the ' paederos' from Pontus , which has a weaker lustre , and the kind from Thasos , which is still weaker .
Finally , there are the stones of Galatia , Thrace and Cyprus .
The defects of the ' paederos' are faintness and the intrusion of uncharacteristic colours , as well as those that belong to all other gems .
SOL Next among the bright colourless stones is the ' asteria ,' or ' star stone ,' which holds its high position owing to a natural peculiarity , in that a light is enclosed in it , stored in something resembling the pupil of the eye .
This light is transmitted and , as the stone is tilted , is displayed successively in different places , as if capable of locomotion within .
When it is held up to the sun the same stone reflects bright beams radiating as if from a star ; and thus it has acquired its name .
The stones found in India are difficult to engrave , and those from Carmania are preferred .
SOL A similarly bright colourless stone is the ' astrion ,' or ' little star ,' which closely resembles rock-crystal , and occurs in India and on the coasts of Patalene .
It has inside it at the centre a star shining brightly like the full moon .
The name is sometimes explained by the fact that the stone , when held up to the stars , is supposed to catch their glitter and reflect it .
It is said that the best variety is found in Carmania , and that no kind of gem is less liable to possess defects .
We are told that there is also a variety known as ' ceraunia ,' or ' thunder-stone ,' which is inferior , and that the worst of all recalls the glimmer of a lantern .
SOL Another stone that is much esteemed is the ' astriotes ,' again a star stone .
It is recorded that Zoroaster proclaimed the remarkable merits of this stone when used in the practice of magic .
SOL The ' astolos' according to Sudines , resembles the eye of a fish and sheds brilliant white beams like the sun .
SOL Among the bright colourless stones there is also the one called ' ceraunia ' (' thunder-stone ') which catches the glitter of the stars and , although in itself it is like rock-crystal , has a brilliant blue sheen .
It is found in Carmania .
Zenothemis admits that it is colourless , but describes it as ' containing a twinkling star .
' He mentions that there are also to be found dull ' cerauniae ' which if steeped in soda and vinegar for several days form such a star , which , however , fades away again after as many months .
Sotacus distinguishes also two other varieties of the stone , a black and a red , resembling axe-heads .
According to him , those among them that are black and round are supernatural objects ; and he states that thanks to them cities and fleets are attacked and overcome , their name being ' baetuli ,' while the elongated stones are ' cerauniae .
' These writers distinguish yet another kind of ' ceraunia ' which is quite rare .
According to them , the Magi hunt for it zealously because it is found only in a place that has been struck by a thunderbolt .
SOL The name that appears in these writers immediately after ' ceraunia ' is that of the so-called ' iris ,' or ' rainbow stone .
' It is dug up on an island in the Red Sea 60 miles distant from the city of Berenice .
In every other respect it is merely rock-crystal , and is sometimes called ' root of crystal ' for this reason .
It is known as ' iris' in token of its appearance , for when it is struck by the sunlight in a room it casts the appearance and colours of a rainbow on the walls near by , continually altering its tints and ever causing more and more astonishment because of its extremely changeable effects .
It is agreed that it has hexagonal faces , like the rock-crystal , but some people assert that it has rough faces and unequal angles ; and that in full sunlight it scatters the beams that shine upon it , and yet at the same time lights up adjacent objects by projecting a kind of gleam in front of itself .
But , as I have said , it does not produce any colours except in a dark place ; and even then , the effect is not as though the stone itself contained the colours , but rather as though it were forcing them to rebound from the wall .
The best kind is that which produces the spectra that are the largest in size with the closest resemblance to a rainbow .
There is also another ' rainbow stone ,' the ' iritis ,' which is similar to the former in every respect except that it is very hard .
According to Orus , this when burnt and crushed to a powder cures ichneumon bites , but is actually found in Persis .
SOL A stone that is similar in its appearance but different in its effects is the so-called ' leros ,' or ' trifle ,' in which there is a white and a black streak traversing the rock-crystal .
SOL I have now discussed the principal gemstones , classifying them according to their colour , and shall proceed to describe the rest in alphabetical order .
SOL The agate was once held in high esteem , but now enjoys none .
It was first discovered in Sicily near the river of the same name , but was later found in many countries .
Its size can be exceptional , and its varieties are very numerous .
The descriptive terms applied to it vary accordingly .
For example , it is given names like ' jasper-agate ,' ' wax-agate ,' ' emerald-agate ,' ' blood-agate ,' ' white agate ,' ' tree-agate ' ( which is distinguished by marks resembling small trees ) , ' anti-agate ' ( which , when burnt , smells like myrrh ) and ' coral-agate ,' which is sprinkled with golden particles like those of lapis lazuli and is a variety that is very plentiful in Crete .
Another name for it is ' sacred agate ,' since it is thought to counteract the bites of spiders and scorpions .
This I would in any ease believe to be true of the Sicilian stones , since the venom of scorpions is destroyed by a mere hint of a breeze from that province .
The agates found in India are also effective in this way and have other very remarkable qualifies besides .
For they exhibit the likenesses of rivers , woods and draught-animals ; and from them also are made dishes , statuettes , horse-trappings and small mortars for the use of pharmacists , for merely to look at them is good for the eyes .
Moreover , if placed in the mouth , they allay thirst .
The Phrygian agates contain no green , while those found at Egyptian Thebes lack red and white veins , but these again are effective against scorpions .
Those of Cyprus are similarly esteemed .
Some people warmly approve of the transparent glassy portions of these last stones .
Agates are found too in Trachis near Mount Oita , on Parnassus , in Lesbos , in Messenia ( where they look like flowers on a field-path ) and in Rhodes .
Other differences among agates arc found in the writings of the Magi .
Stones are found that resemble a lion 's skin , and these , they claim , are effective against scorpions .
But in Persia , according to them , the fumes from these stones , when they are burnt , avert storms and waterspouts and stop the flow of rivers , the test of a genuine stone being that it should cool the water when placed in a cauldron that is on the boil .
But they insist that , if the stones are to do good , they should be tied to hairs from a lion 's mane .
Incidentally , when attached to hairs from a hyena 's mane , they avert discord in the household .
According to the Magi , there is an agate of one single colour that makes athletes invincible .
The method of testing such a stone is to throw it into a pot full of oil with various pigments : when it has been heated for no more than two hours it should have reduced all the pigments to a single shade of vermilion .
SOL The ' acopos ,' or ' reviver ,' which in colour resembles soda , is porous and spangled with gold particles .
Oil heated along with this stone and applied as an embrocation dispels fatigue , or so we are led to believe .
SOL ' Alabastritis ,' which is found at Alabastrum in Egypt and at Damascus in Syria , is a white stone interspersed with various colours .
When burnt with rock salt and pounded , it is said to alleviate bad breath caused by the mouth and teeth .
' Alectoriae ,' or ' cock stones ,' is the name given to stones found in the gizzards of cocks .
In appearance they are like rock-crystal , and in size like beans ; and it is claimed that Milo of Croton owes to his use of these stones his reputation as one who was never worsted in a contest .
The ' androdamas ,' or ' man tamer ,' has a silvery glint , like ' adamas ,' and always resembles small cubes .
The Magi suppose that its name has been applied to it in virtue of the fact that it subdues violence and hot temper in men .
Whether the ' argyrodamas ,' or ' silver tamer ,' is the same , or a different , stone , is not made clear by our authorities .
' Antipathes ,' or the ' contrary stone ,' is black and opaque .
Its genuineness is tested by boiling it in milk , to which it gives the appearance of myrrh .
One might perhaps be entitled to expect something prodigious of this stone ; for there are many instances of ' antipathetic ' substances , and yet it has been granted exclusive possession of the name .
The Magi claim that it helps to counteract witchcraft .
The Arabian stone closely resembles ivory , and would pass for it if its hardness did not forbid this .
According to the Magi , it helps its possessors when they have pains in their sinews .
The ' aromatitis ,' or ' aromatic stone ,' is also found in Arabia , but likewise in Egypt near Philae .
It is always stony and , since it has the colour and scent of myrrh , it is much used by queens .
' Asbestos ,' which is found in the mountains of Arcadia , has the colour of iron .
' Aspisatis ,' according to Democritus , occurs in Arabia and is of a fiery red colour .
He recommends that sufferers from an enlarged spleen should wear it as an amulet with camel dung .
However that may be , he states that it is found in the nests of Arabian birds , and that another stone bearing the same name and found in Arabia on Cape Leucopetra has a darting silvery lustre and is effective in counteracting attacks of wild distraction .
The Atizoe , he writes , is found in India and on Mount Acidane in Persis .
He describes it as shining brightly like silver , as being just over two inches in length with the shape of a lentil and an agreeable scent , and as being indispensable for the Magi at the installation of a king .
The ' augitis' is supposed by many to be identical with the ' callaina .
' ' Amphidanes' is the stone otherwise known as ' chrysocolla .
' It occurs in the region of India where gold is dug up by ants .
The stone is found actually in the gold , being similar to gold and having the shape of a cube .
Its nature is positively stated to be the same as that of the magnet , except that , according to tradition , it also causes gold to increase .
The ' aphrodisiac ' stone is red mixed with white .
As for the ' apsyetos ,' or ' uncooled stone ,' it retains its warmth for seven days if it is thoroughly heated in a fire , and is black , heavy and marked with red veins .
It is thought to counteract cold .
By the ' Egyptilla ,' or ' little Egyptian stone ,' Iaechus understands a stone in which the white layer is traversed by bands of carnelian and black , but the term is commonly applied where there is a black ground and an upper layer of blue .
It is named after the country where it is found .
SOL As to the ' balanites ,' or ' acorn-stone ,' there are two varieties , of which one is greenish and the other like Corinthian bronze in its colour .
The former comes from Coptos and the latter from the Cave-dweller Country , and both are intersected through the middle by a bright red layer .
The ' batrachites ,' or ' frog-stone ,' also comes from Coptos : one variety has a colour like that of a frog , a second is similar and also has veins , while a third is red mixed with black .
The ' baptes ,' or ' dipper ,' has an exceptionally pleasant scent , but is otherwise an ordinary soft stone .
The ' Eye of Baal ' has a whitish ground surrounding a dark eye which sends out a golden gleam from its midst .
Because of its appearance , the stone is consecrated to the holiest god of the Assyrians .
There is another ' Baal stone ,' as it is called , which , according to Democritus , is found at Arbela and is as large as a walnut , with a glassy appearance .
' Baroptenus ,' also known as ' baripe ,' is a black stone with blood-red and white nodules .
SOL As an amulet it is rejected because it is liable to cause monstrous births .
' Botryitis ,' or ' grape-cluster ,' occurs in two varieties , of which one is dark and the other has the colour of a vine , and resembles a young grape .
' Bostrychitis' is the name given by Zoroaster to a stone that somewhat resembles the locks of a woman 's hair .
' Bucardia ,' resembling an ox-heart , is found only at Babylon .
' Brontea ,' or ' thunder stone ,' which is like the head of a tortoise , is supposed to fall from thunderclaps and to extinguish fires where lightning has struck , or so we are led to believe .
The ' bolos ,' or ' clod ,' is found in the river Ebro and is like a clod of earth .
SOL ' Cadmitis' is identical with the so-called ' ostracitis ,' except that the latter is sometimes surrounded with blue globules .
' Callais' is similar to lapis lazuli , except that its colour is lighter , like that of the sea close inshore .
' Capnitis ,' or ' smoke stone ,' is regarded by some as a separate variety , but many people treat it as a smoky ' iaspis ,' as I have described it in the appropriate place .
The ' Stone of Cappadocia ' occurs there and in Phrygia , and is like ivory .
The ' callaica ' is so called from its colour , which is that of a clouded ' callais ,' and it is said that several of these stones are always found joined together .
The ' catochitis ,' or ' clinging stone ,' belongs to Corsica and is larger than other precious stones , and more remarkable , if the reports are true , because , if the hand rests on it the stone sticks to it like gum .
The ' catoptritis ,' or ' mirror-stone ,' which occurs in Cappadocia , reflects images from its bright colourless surface .
The ' cepitis ,' also known as ' cepolatitis ,' is white , with lines of veins that meet at a single point .
The ' ceramitis ,' or ' pottery-stone ,' has the colour of earthenware. or ' cinaedus stones ,' are white , oblong stones found in the brain of the fish so named .
They have a remarkable effect if only we can believe the statement that they predict conditions at sea , foretelling mist or calm as the case may be .
' Ceritis' reminds us of wax , ' circos' of a hawk , ' corsoides' of grey hair , and ' coralloachates ,' or ' coral-agate ,' of coral .
This has markings like drops of gold .
The ' corallis' resembles vermilion , and occurs in India and at Syene .
The ' erateritis ,' or ' strong stone ,' has a colour between that of yellow sapphire and of amber , and is very hard .
The ' crocallis' reproduces exactly the appearance of the cells of a honeycomb .
' Cyitis ,' (' pregnant stone ') which is found in the neighbourhood of Coptos , is white and seems to be pregnant with another stone , the presence of which is in fact perceived by a rattling sound .
The ' chalcophonos ,' or ' brazen-voiced stone ,' which is black , rings like bronze when it is dashed against anything ; and actors of tragedies are urged to wear it .
As to ' chelidoniae ,' or ' swallow-stones ,' there are two varieties , both of which are swallow-coloured with purple on one side , but in one variety the purple is interspersed with black markings .
The ' chelonia ,' Chelon , ' tortoise-stone ,' is the eye of the Indian tortoise and , according to the false allegations of the Magi , is the most miraculous of all stones .
For they claim that the stone , if it is placed on the tongue after the mouth has been rinsed with honey , confers powers of prophecy — at full moon or new moon , during the whole of the day ; when the moon is waning , before sunrise only ; and at other times , from dawn to midday .
There are also tortoise-stones which are the eyes of other tortoises and resemble the tortoise-stone previously mentioned ; and according to their guidance the Magi often pronounce prophetic incantations in order to cause storms to subside .
The variety , however , that is sprinkled with gold drops is said by them to generate storms if it is dropped into boiling water with a scarab beetle .
The ' chloritis ,' or ' greenstone ,' which is of a grassy colour , is said by the Magi to be found as a congenital growth in the crop of the water-wagtail .
They recommend that it should be set in an iron bezel so as to produce certain of their all too familiar miracles .
The ' choaspitis ,' which is named after the river Choaspes , is of a brilliant gold colour mixed with green .
The ' chrysolampis ,' or ' golden gleam ,' which found in Ethiopia , is generally pale , but fiery by night .
The ' chrysopis ,' or ' golden face ,' looks just like gold .
The ' Cetionis' is found in Aeolis at Atarneus , now a village , but once a town .
It is a transparent stone of many colours .
The hue is sometimes that of glass , sometimes of rock-crystal and sometimes of ' iaspis ,' but even the stones with flaws in them have so brilliant a lustre that they reflect an image as if they were mirrors .
SOL The ' daphnea ,' or ' laurel stone ,' is prescribed by Zoroaster as a cure for epilepsy .
The ' diadochos ,' or ' substitute ,' resembles beryl .
The ' diphyes' is a stone of twofold character .
It is subdivided into a black and a white , a male and a female variety , each of the two varieties bearing an outline that distinctively portrays the organ of its sex .
The ' Dionysias ,' or ' stone of Dionysus ,' a hard stone , the colour of which is black intermingled with red spots , produces the flavour of wine when it is ground to powder and mixed with water , and is supposed to be an antidote to drunkenness .
The ' draconitis ,' otherwise known as ' dracontias ,' the ' snake stone ,' is obtained from the brains of snakes , but unless the head is cut off from a live snake , the substance fails to turn into a gem , owing to the spite of the creature as it perceives that it is doomed .
Consequently , the beast 's head is lopped off while it is asleep .
Sotacus , who writes that he saw such a gem in the possession of a king , states that those who go in search of it ride in two-horsed chariots , and that when they see the snake they scatter sleeping-drugs and so put it to sleep before they cut off its head .
According to him , the stone is colourless and transparent , and cannot subsequently be polished or submitted to any other skilful process .
SOL The ' encardia ,' or ' heart stone ,' has been given the epithet ' enaristera ,' or ' left-side ,' and shows the likeness of a heart in high relief on a black ground .
Another variety bearing the same name displays the likeness of a heart in green , and a third in black , the rest of the stone being white .
The ' enorchis' is white , and when it is split up into pieces reproduces exactly the shape of the testicles .
' Exhebenus' is , according to Zoroaster , a handsome white stone which goldsmiths use for polishing gold .
' Erythallis ,' although it is white , looks red when it is tilted .
The ' erotylos ,' or ' love stone ,' otherwise known as ' amphicomos' and ' hieromnemon ,' is praised by Democritus in virtue of its use in prophecy .
The ' eumeces ,' or ' tall stone ,' which is found in Bactria , resembles hard limestone , and , when it is placed beneath the head like a pillow , produces dreams that have the force of an oracle .
The ' eumitres ,' or ' fine headdress ,' is held in high regard by the Assyrians as the jewel of Baal , the most holy of their gods .
Its colour is that of the leek , and it is much favoured in religious observances .
The ' eupetalos ,' or ' leafy stone ,' has four colours , blue , fiery red , shaped like an olive stone , is fluted like a seashell , vermilion , and apple-green .
' Eureos ,' which is but is not so white .
' Eurotias ,' or ' mouldy stone ,' looks as if its black surface were covered with mildew .
' Eusebes ,' or ' reverent stone ,' is the kind of stone of which a seat in the temple of Hercules at Tyre is said to have been made , this seat being the one from which only the pious could rise without difficulty .
' Epimelas ,' or ' black-on-top ,' is an instance of a white gemstone that is overlaid with black .
SOL ' Galaxias ,' or ' milk stone ,' which is sometimes known as ' galactites ,' is similar to the stones next mentioned , but is traversed by blood-red or white streaks .
' Galactitis' is entirely milk-white , and is known also as ' leucogaea ' (' white earth ') , ' leucographitis' (' white chalk ') , and ' synechitis' (' cohesive earth ') .
It is noteworthy for the fact that when rubbed between the fingers it exhibits a milky smear and flavour , and in the rearing of children it ensures wet-nurses a plentiful flow of milk .
Moreover , when it is tied to the necks of babies as an amulet , it is said to make their saliva flow , but we are told that when placed in the mouth it melts and also causes loss of memory .
Two rivers , the Nile and the Achelous , produce this substance .
Some people apply the term ' galactites' to a ' smaragdus' that is banded with white streaks .
' Gallaica ' is similar to ' argyrodamas ,' but is somewhat less pure .
Two or three stones are found joined together .
The ' gassinnades ,' which comes from Media , has the colour of wild vetch and looks as if it were sprinkled with flowers .
It is found also at Arbela .
This is yet another gem that is said to conceive , and to betray the presence of the stone in its womb if it is shaken .
The ' embryo ,' we are told , takes three months to develop .
' Glossopetra ,' or ' tongue stone ,' which resembles the human tongue , does not , we are told , form in the ground , but falls from the sky during the waning of the moon , and is indispensable to the moon-diviner .
Our scepticism with regard to this account is reinforced by the falseness of the claim made for the stone ; for it is stated that it checks gales .
The ' Gorgonia ,' or ' Gorgon 's stone ,' is merely coral .
The reason for its name is that it is transformed into the hardness of stone after being softened in the sea .
It is said to keep off thunderbolts and whirlwinds .
The ' goniaea ,' or ' faceted stone ,' is guaranteed just as falsely to bring about the punishment of one 's private enemies .
SOL The heliotrope , which is found in Ethiopia , Africa and Cyprus , is leek-green in colour , but is marked with blood-red streaks .
The name is explained by the fact that , when the stone is dropped into a vessel of water and bright sunshine falls upon it , in reflecting the sunlight it changes it into the colour of blood .
This is true especially of the Ethiopian variety .
When it is out of water , the same stone catches the sunlight like a mirror and detects solar eclipses , showing the passage of the moon below the sun 's disc .
Here , moreover , we have quite the most blatant instance of effrontery on the part of the Magi , who say that when the heliotrope plant is joined to the stone and certain prayers are pronounced over them the wearer is rendered invisible .
The ' Hephaestitis ,' or ' Hephaestus stone ,' is another that acts like a mirror in reflecting images , even though it is red .
The test of its genuineness is that boiling water when poured over it should cool immediately ; or , alternatively , that when placed in the sun it should immediately set fire to a parched substance .
The stone is found at Corycus .
The Hermuaedoeon , or ' sexual organ of Hermes ,' is so called from its resemblance to the male organ , the gemstone on which the likeness appears being white or sometimes black , or pale yellow , and surrounded by a circular band of golden yellow .
The ' hexecontalithos ,' or ' sixty-stones-in-one ,' contains many colours in a small compass , and so has appropriated its name .
It is found in the Cave-dweller Country .
The ' hieracitis ,' or ' kite stone ,' is entirely covered with feathery scales , black ones alternating with others resembling a kite 's feathers .
' Hammitis ,' or ' sandy stone ,' resembles fish roe , and there is another kind that looks as if it were composed of soda , but is otherwise just a very hard stone .
' Hammonis cornu ,' or ' horn of Ammon ,' which is among the most sacred stones of Ethiopia , has a golden yellow colour and is shaped like a ram 's horn .
The stone is guaranteed to ensure without fail dreams that will come true .
The ' hormiscion ,' or ' necklace stone ,' which in its appearance is among the most pleasing of gemstones , reflects beams of gold from a fiery red ground , and these gold beams carry a white gleam at their tips .
' Hyaeniae ,' or ' hyena stones ,' are , it is said , obtained from the eyes of the hyena , which is actually attacked for the purpose .
When the stones are placed under a man 's tongue , they are alleged to foretell the future , if we are foolish enough to believe such a thing .
' Haematitis' of the finest quality occurs in Ethiopia , but the stone is found also both in Arabia and in Africa .
It is blood-red in colour .
We must not omit to mention the claims made for it , so that we may expose the treacherous frauds perpetrated by the Magi .
Zachalias of Babylon , in the volumes which he dedicates to King Mithridates , attributes man 's destiny to the influence of precious stones ; and as for the ' haematitis ,' he is not content to credit it with curing diseases of the eyes and liver , but places it even in the hands of petitioners to the king , allows it to interfere in lawsuits and trials , and proclaims also that to be smeared with an ointment containing it is beneficial in battle .
There is another stone of the same kind which is sometimes called ' menui ,' and sometimes ' xuthos ,' or ' brownish-yellow ' stone .
This is the name given by the Greeks to stones that are .
light brown .
SOL ' Idaei dactyli ,' or ' Fingers of Ida ,' have the colour of iron and reproduce the shape of the human thumb .
The ' icterias ,' or ' jaundice stone ,' is like the yellow skin of an apple , and is therefore considered to be beneficial in treating jaundice .
There is also another stone of the same name , but of a more leaden colour .
A third , resembling a leaf and flatter than the former varieties , is almost without weight and has dull yellow streaks .
A fourth kind has dull yellow streaks spreading over a ground of a similar colour , but darker .
' Iovis gemma ,' or ' Jupiter 's gem ,' is white , light in weight , and soft .
It is known also as ' drosolithos ,' or ' dew stone .
' The ' Indica ,' or ' Indian stone ,' takes the name of its country of origin and is of a reddish hue , but when rubbed between the fingers exudes a purple liquid .
Another stone of the same name is colourless and has a dusty appearance .
The ' ion ,' or ' violet stone ,' is a violet-coloured stone found in India , but only rarely is its colour bright and deep .
SOL The ' lepidotis ,' or ' scaly stone ,' mimics fish scales in various colours , while the ' Lesbias ,' or ' stone of Lesbos ,' resembles a clod of earth .
It takes its name from its country of origin , but is found also in India .
The ' leucophthalmos ,' or ' white eye ,' which is otherwise reddish , includes an eye-shaped layer which is white and black .
The ' lencopoecilos ,' or ' variegated white stone ,' has a white ground marked with drops of vermilion mixed with gold .
The ' libanochrus ,' or ' colour-of-incense ,' shows a resemblance to frankincense and gives off a honey-coloured streak .
The ' limoniatis ,' or ' meadow stone ,' seems to be identical with the ' smaragdus .
' SOL As for the ' liparea ,' the only fact that is reported is that , when it is burnt , all beasts are flushed from their hiding-places by its fumes .
The ' lysimachos' is similar to Rhodian marble with golden-yellow veins , and has to be considerably reduced in size by polishing so that its superfluous excrescences may be smoothed away .
The ' leucochrysos ,' or ' golden-white stone ,' consists of a ' chrysolithos' interspersed with white .
SOL No description of the ' Memnonia ,' or ' stone of Memnon ,' exists .
As for the ' Media ,' a black stone found by the Media who is so famous in legend , it has veins of a golden-yellow colour , exudes saffron-yellow moisture and reproduces the flavour of wine .
The ' meconitis ,' or ' poppy stone ,' closely resembles the poppy .
' Mithrax ' comes from Persia and the mountains of the Persian Gulf .
It is a stone of many colours and reflects their changing tints in sunlight .
' Morochthos' is leek-green in colour and exudes milky moisture .
' Mormorion ,' a very dark translucent stone from India , is also known as ' promnion ' ; but it is called ' Alexandrion ,' or ' Alexander stone ,' when the colour of garnet is mingled with it , and ' Cyprium ,' when that of carnelian is present .
It is found also at Tyre and in Galatia and , according to Xenocrates , occurs as well close to the Alps .
These are gems which are eminently suitable for cameo-engraving .
The ' myrrhitis ,' or ' myrrh stone ,' has the colour of myrrh and an appearance quite unlike that of a gemstone .
It smells like an unguent and , when rubbed , even like spikenard .
The ' black myrmecias ,' or ' wart stone ,' has excrescences like warts , while the ' myrsinitis ,' or ' myrtle stone ,' is honey-coloured and has the scent of myrtle .
A stone is ' mesoleucos ,' or ' white in the middle ,' when a white band marks the middle of the gem ; and is ' mesomelas ,' or ' black in the middle ,' when a black layer intersects a gem of any colour in the middle .
SOL The ' Nasamonitis ,' or ' stone of the Nasamones ,' is blood-red with black veins .
The ' nebritis ,' or ' fawn stone ,' which is sacred to Father Liber , derives its name from its resemblance to a fawnskin , but there is another stone of the same kind that is black and white .
' Nipparene ,' which gets its name from a city and tribe of Persia , is like the tooth of a hippopotamus .
SOL The stone that bears the foreign name ' oica ' is a pleasing mixture of black , reddish-brown , green and white .
The ' ombria ' (' rain stone ') , otherwise known as ' notia ' (' south-wind stone ') , is said to fall , like the ' ceraurila ' and the ' brontea ,' in company with heavy rain and thunderbolts , and to have the same properties as these stones .
But in addition , so we are told , it prevents offerings from being burnt away if it is placed on an altar .
' Onocardia ,' or ' ass 's heart ,' is like the scarlet kermes-insect in colour , but we are told nothing further .
' Oritis ,' or ' mountain stone ,' sometimes known also as ' sideritis ,' ' iron stone ,' is spherical in shape and not affected by fire .
' Ostracias ,' or ' sherd stone ,' otherwise known as ' ostracitis ,' resembles earthenware , but is harder than ' ceramitis .
' It is like agate except that the latter has a greasy appearance when it has been polished .
This ' ostracias' is so hard that other gemstones are engraved with pieces of it .
The ' ostritis ,' or ' oyster stone ,' owes its name to its resemblance to an oyster-shell .
' Ophicardelos' is the foreign name for a black stone that is encircled by two white bands .
Obsidian has already been discussed by me in an earlier book .
There are also found gems bearing this same name and colour not merely in Ethiopia and India but also in Samnium and , as some people think , in Spain on the shores of the Atlantic .
SOL The ' panchrus ,' or ' stone of all colours ,' is composed of almost every colour .
' Pangonus ,' or all-angles , is no longer than a finger , and it is only its more numerous plane faces that prevent it from being taken for rock-crystal .
As for the ' paneros ,' or ' all-love ,' Metrodorus does not describe it , but he as cites quite a tasteful poem on the stone composed by Queen Timaris and dedicated to Venus .
In this poem it is implied that the stone helped her to bear children .
Some people call it ' panerastos ,' or ' loved-by-all .
' The Pontic stone occurs in several varieties .
It is spangled sometimes with blood-red , sometimes with golden spots , and is regarded as a supernatural object .
One variety has , instead of stars , similarly coloured lines , and another , figures recalling mountains and deep valleys .
The ' phloginos ,' or ' flame-coloured stone ,' which is also known as ' chrysitis ,' or ' gold stone ,' resembles the yellow ochre of Attica and is found in Egypt .
The ' phoenicitis ,' or ' date-palm stone ,' is so called from its resemblance to a date , and the ' phycitis ,' or ' seaweed stone ,' from its similarity to seaweed .
A stone is ' perileucos ,' or ' white-around ,' when a white line descends ( in a spiral ) from the margin to the very base of the stone .
The ' paeanis ,' or ' Apollo stone ,' otherwise known as ' gaeanis ,' the ' earth stone ,' is said to become pregnant and to give birth to another stone , and so is thought to relieve labour pains .
Its birthplace is in Macedonia , near the tomb of Tiresias , and its appearance is that of ice .
SOL ' Solls gemma ,' or ' gem of the sun ,' is a bright colourless stone that sheds its beams in such a way as to resemble the sun 's shining disc .
' Sagda ' is the name given by the astrologers to a leek-green stone which they find , so they say , attached to ships' hulls .
' Samothrax ,' or ' stone of Samothrace ,' is produced in the island after which it is named , and is black , light in weight and like wood .
The ' sauritis ,' or ' lizard stone ,' is stated to be found in the belly of a green lizard when it has been slit with a reed .
The ' sarcitis ,' or ' fleshy stone ,' closely resembles ox-flesh .
The ' selenitis ,' or ' moonstone ,' a transparent , colourless stone with a honey-coloured sheen , contains a likeness of the moon , and reproduces , if the report is true , the very shape of the moon as it waxes or wanes from day today .
It is thought to occur in Arabia .
The ' sideritis ,' or ' iron stone ,' resembles iron and likewise causes some people to quarrel when it is brought to a dispute .
It is found in Ethiopia .
The ' sideropoecilos ,' or ' mottled iron stone ,' is a variety of this stone , mottled with specks .
' Spongitis ,' or ' sponge stone ,' is absolutely true to its name .
The ' synodontitis' comes from the brain of the fish known as ' synodus .
' The ' Syrtitis ,' or ' stone of Syrtis ,' is found on the shores of the Gulf of Sidra , and indeed , moreover , in Lucania .
It is honey-coloured with a saffron-yellow sheen and contains faint starry spots inside it .
' Syringitis ,' or ' pipe stone ,' which resembles the length of a stalk between two of its joints , is hollow , with a tube running right through it .
SOL The ' trichrus ,' or ' three-coloured ' stone , which comes from Africa , is black , but gives off streaks of three colours , black at the base , blood-red in the middle and yellow at the top .
The ' thelyrrhizos ,' or ' lady root ,' is ashen or red in colour and is distinguished by its white base .
The ' thelycardios ,' or ' lady heart ,' which displays the colour of a heart , gives great pleasure to the Persians , among whom it is found .
Their name for it is ' mucul .
' The ' Thracia ,' or ' Thracian gem ,' occurs in three varieties , emerald-green or alternatively paler , while the third has blood-red spots on it .
' Tephritis ,' or ' ash stone ,' displays a likeness of the new moon with curving horns , but on a ground that is the colour of ash .
The ' tecolithos ,' or ' solvent stone ,' looks like an olive stone and has no value as a gem , but when sucked breaks up and disperses stone in the bladder .
SOL ' Veneris crinis ,' or ' the lock of Venus ,' is a very dark , brilliant stone , which has an inclusion resembling a lock of red hair .
The ' Veientana ,' which is an Italian gemstone found at Veii , has a black ground defined by a white edge .
SOL The ' zathenes ,' according to Democritus , is an amber-coloured stone found in Media , and if it is ground with palm wine and saffron softens like wax and has a most agreeable smell .
The ' zamilampis ,' Zamilar which is found in the Euphrates , is like the marble from the island of Marmara , but is greyish-green in the centre .
' Zoraniscaea ' is said to be a gem found in the river Indus and used by the Magi , but , apart from this , nothing is reported about it .
SOL There is still another way of classifying precious stones , and it is one which I should like to employ , now that I have already from time to time varied my method of presenting my theme .
For there are stones named after parts of the body , for example ' hepatitis' after the liver , and numerous past kinds of steatitis after the fat found in one animal or another .
We find ' Adad 's kidney ,' ' Adad 's eye ' and ' Adad 's finger ,' Adad also being a god who is worshipped by the Syrians .
Again , ' triophthalmos' is a variety of onyx that displays the likeness of three human eyes simultaneously .
SOL Precious stones are named after animals ; for example ' carcinias' takes its name from the colour of the crab , and ' echitis' from that of the viper .
' Scorpitis' is so named because it displays the colour or else the likeness of a scorpion , ' scaritis ,' similarly , of a parrot-wrasse , and ' triglitis ,' of a red mullet .
' Aegophthalmos' takes its name from a goat 's eye , and another stone likewise from a pig 's eye .
' Geranitis' owes its name to the crane 's neck , ' hieracitis' to the kite and ' aetitis' to the colour of the white-tailed eagle .
' Myrmecitis' displays a naturally formed likeness of a crawling ant , and ' cantharias' that of scarab beetles .
' Lycophthalmos' is a stone of four colours , red mixed with blood-red , while in the middle it has black encircled by white , like a wolf 's eye .
' Taos' is like a peacock ; and a stone which I find bearing the name ' timictonia ' similarly resembles an asp in colour .
SOL A resemblance to inanimate objects is found in ' ammochrysus ,' or ' sand-gold ,' which looks like gold mixed with sand ; in ' cenchrites ,' or ' millet stone ,' which looks as if it were sprinkled with grains of millet ; and in ' dryites ,' or ' oak stone ,' which resembles the trunk of an oak .
Moreover , this stone burns like wood .
The ' cissitis ,' or ' ivy stone ,' is a transparent , colourless stone in which ivy leaves are visible , and these cover the whole stone .
' Narcissitis' is marked with veins coloured like narcissus , and has also its scent .
' Cyarnias ,' or ' bean stone ,' is black , but when broken produces from its interior an object resembling a bean .
The ' pyren ' is so called because it is like an olive stone : sometimes it looks as if it contains fish bones .
The ' phoenicitis' is like a date .
' Chalazias ,' or ' hail stone ,' has the whiteness arid the shape of hailstones , and is as hard as ' adamas ,' so that even when it is placed in a lire it is said to retain its natural coolness .
' Pyritis ,' or ' fire stone ,' even though it is black , scorches the fingers when it is rubbed .
' Polyzonos ,' or ' many-banded stone ,' is marked with a number of white bands on a black ground , while the ' astrapaea ,' or ' lightning stone ,' on a colourless or blue ground is traversed in the centre by beams like lightning flashes .
The ' phlogitis ,' or ' flame stone ,' seems to have burning inside it a flame which , however , is not released , while the ' anthracitis ,' or ' carbuncle stone ,' appears to have sparks running in different directions through it .
The ' enhygros ,' or ' stone with moisture inside it ,' has a white , smooth ground , and is always perfectly round .
When it is shaken , liquid moves to and fro inside it , as in an egg .
The ' polythrix ,' or ' hairy stone ,' displays hairy streaks on a green ground , but , in spite of its appearance , is said to make one 's hair fall out .
There are also the so-called ' lion-skin ' and ' leopard-skin ' stones .
Colours too have lent their names to stones .
' Drosolithos ,' or ' dew stone ,' takes its name from its grass-green tint , ' melichrus ,' of which there are several kinds , from its honey colour , ' melichlorus ,' or ' honey-yellow stone ,' from two tints combined , because it is partly yellow and partly honey-coloured ; while ' crocias' is sprinkled as if with saffron , ' polias' with a greyish — white tint , and ' spartopolias' with markings of a greyish-white more dispersed .
' Rhoditis' is ' rose-coloured ,' melitis ' apple-coloured ,' ' chalcitis' copper coloured and ' sychitis' ' fig-coloured ' .
' Bostrychitis' has white or blood-red leaves branching out on a black ground , while ' chernitis' presents the appearance of white hands clasping each other on stone .
The ' anancitis ,' or ' compulsive stone ,' it is said , is used in divination by water to conjure up divine apparitions , while the ' synochitis ,' or ' holding stone ,' so we are told , holds the shades of the dead when they have been summoned from below .
As for the white ' dendritis ,' or ' tree stone ,' it is said that if it is buried beneath a tree that is being felled the edges of the axes will not be blunted .
There are many more stones that are even more magical ; and these have received foreign names from men who have thus betrayed the fact that they are ordinary , worthless stones , and not precious stones at all .
But I shall here remain content with having exposed the abominable falsehoods of the Magi .
SOL New , unnamed precious stones come into existence quite unexpectedly , like one which , according to Theophrastus , was once found in the gold mines near Lampsacus and was sent to King Alexander owing to its great beauty .
Moreover , ' Cochlides ,' or ' shell stones ,' are now very common , but are really artificial rather than natural .
In Arabia they are found as huge lumps , and these are said to be boiled in honey without interruption for seven days and nights .
Thus all earthy and other impurities are eliminated ; and the lump , cleansed and purified , is divided into various shapes by clever craftsmen , who are careful to follow up the veins and elongated markings in such a way as to ensure the readiest sale .
Formerly , these lumps were produced in such large sizes that in the East they were made into frontlets for kings' horses aud into pendants to serve as trappings for them .
In general , all gems are rendered more colourful by being boiled thoroughly in honey , particularly if it is Corsican honey , which is unsuitable for any other purpose owing to its acidity .
Cunning and talented artists succeed also in cutting away parts of variegated stones so as to obtain novelties ; and in order that these selfsame stones may not bear their usual name , they call them ' physis ,' or ' works of nature ,' and offer them for sale as natural curiosities .
SOL But there is no end to the names given to precious stones , and I have no intention of listing them in full , innumerable as they are , thanks to the wanton imagination of the Greeks .
Now that I have mentioned the precious stones , and also some , indeed , that are common , I must be content with having given emphasis to the rarer varieties that deserve notice .
One point only should be remembered , that , according to the different marks and excrescences that appear on the surface of stones , and according to the varied tracks and colours of the bands that traverse them , names are often altered when the material is commonly the same .
SOL Now I shall make some general observations which concern our study of any precious stone ; and here I shall adopt the notions of our authorities .
SOL Concave or convex stones are considered less valuable than those with a plane surface .
An elongated shape is the most valuable ; then what is called the lenticular ; and then a flat , round shape .
Stones with sharp angles find the least favour .
SOL To distinguish genuine and false gemstones is extremely difficult , particularly as men have discovered how to make genuine stones of one variety into false stones of another .
For example , a sardonyx can be manufactured so convincingly by sticking three gems together that the artifice cannot be detected : a black stone is taken from one species , a white from another , and a vermilion-coloured stone from a third , all being excellent in their own way .
And furthermore , there are treatises by authorities , whom I at least shall not deign to mention by name , describing how by means of dyestuffs emeralds and other transparent coloured gems are made from rock-crystal , or a sardonyx from a sard , and similarly all other gemstones from one stone or another .
And there is no other trickery that is practised against society with greater profit .
SOL I , on the other hand , am prepared to explain the methods of detecting false gems , since it is only fitting that even luxury should be protected against deception .
Apart , then , from the details that I have given in describing the best stones of each class , it is recommended that transparent stones in general should be tested early in the morning or , if necessary , np to ten o'clock , but on no account later than this .
Tests are made in many different ways : first by weight , because genuine stones are heavier ; then by coolness , since genuine stones also feel colder in the mouth ; and after this by structure .
For artificial stones show globules deep below the surface , rough patches on the surface itself , filaments , an inconsistent lustre and a brightness that fails to strike the eye .
The most effective test is to knock off a piece of the stone so that it can be baked on an iron plate , but dealers in precious stones not unnaturally object to this , and likewise to testing with a file .
Flakes of obsidian will not scratch a genuine stone , but on a false stone every scratch leaves a white mark .
Furthermore , there is a great difference as between one stone and another in that some cannot be engraved with an iron tool and some only with a blunt iron tool , although all can be worked with a diamond point .
But what is most effective in working gemstones is the heat generated by the drill .
The rivers that produce gems are the Chenab and the Ganges , and of all the lands that produce them India is the most prolific .
SOL For now that I have completed my survey of Nature 's works , it is right that I should make a critical assessment of her products , as well of the lands that produce them .
This , then , I declare : in the whole world , wherever the Vault of heaven turns , there is no land so well adorned with all that wins Nature 's crown as Italy , the ruler and second mother of the world , with her men and women , her generals and soldiers , her slaves , her pre-eminence in arts and crafts , her wealth of brilliant talent , and , again , her geographical position and her healthy , temperate climate , the easy access which she offers to all other peoples , her shores with their many harbours , and the kindly winds that blow upon her .
All these benefits accrue to her from her situation — for the land juts out in the direction that is most advantageous , midway between the East and the West — and from her abundant supply of water , her healthy forests , her mountains with their passes , her harmless wild creatures , her fertile soil and her rich pastures .
Nowhere are the things that man is entitled to expect more excellent — crops , wine , olive oil , wool , flax , cloth and young cattle .
Even the native breed of homes is preferred to any other on the training-ground .
In ores , whether of gold , silver , copper or iron , no country surpassed her so long as it was lawful to work them .
Now she keeps them within her womb , and all her bounty lies in the many different liquors and the diverse savours of crops and fruits that she lavishes upon us .
Next to Italy , if we leave aside the fabulous marvels of India , I would place Spain , or at least the districts where Spain is bordered by the sea .
For although the country is partly rough desert , yet all its productive regions are rich in crops , oil , wine , horses and every kind of ore .
So far , Gaul is Spain 's equal .
But it is Spain 's deserts that give her the advantage ; for here we find esparto grass , selenite and even luxury — in the form of pigments ; here is a place where there is an incentive to toil , where slaves can be schooled , where men 's bodies are hard and their hearts passionately eager .
SOL However , to return to products pure and simple , the most costly product of the sea is the pearl ; of the earth 's surface , rock-crystal ; of the earth 's interior , diamonds , emeralds , gemstones and vessels of fluorspar ; of the earth 's increase , the scarlet kermes-insect and silphium , with spikenard and silks from leaves , citrus wood from trees , cinnamon , cassia and amomum from shrubs , amber , balsam , myrrh and frankincense , which exude from trees or shrubs , and costus from roots .
As for those animals which are equipped to breathe , the most costly product found on land is the elephant 's tusk , and on sea the turtle 's shell .
Of the hides and coats of animals , the most costly are the pelts dyed in China and the Arabian she-goat 's tufted beard which we call ' ladanum .
' Of creatures that belong to both land and sea , the most costly products are scarlet and purple dyes made from shell-fish .
Birds are credited with no outstanding contribution except warriors' plumes and the grease of the Commagene goose .
We must not forget to mention that gold , for which all mankind has so mad a passion , comes scarcely tenth in the list of valuables , while silver , with which we purchase gold , is almost as low as twentieth .
Hail , Nature , mother of all creation , and mindful that I alone of the men of Rome have praised thee in all thy manifestations , be gracious unto me .
SOL
