THERE follow the medicinal benefits obtained from aquatic animals ; Nature the Creator is not idle even among them , but puts forth her tireless strength on waves , billows , ebb and flow of tides , and the rapid currents of rivers ; and nowhere with greater might , if we will but admit the truth , seeing that this element is lord over all the others .
Water swallows up the land , destroys flames , climbs aloft claiming the sovereignty even of the sky , and by a blanket of clouds chokes the life-giving spirit , so forcing out thunderbolts , the world waging civil war with itself .
What can be more wonderful than water seated in the sky ?
But as though it were a little thing to reach this great height , water sucks up thither with itself shoals of fish , and often even stones , carrying up aloft a weight other than its own .
This element also falls again to become the source of all things that spring from the earth .
Right wonderful action this on the part of Nature , if one considers it : in order that crops may grow , and that trees and shrubs may live , water soars to the sky and brings down thence even to plants the breath of life , so we are forced to admit that all the powers of earth too are part of the beneficence of water .
Wherefore I shall first of all give examples of the might of water , for what mortal man could count them all ?
SOL Everywhere in many lands gush forth beneficent waters , here cold , there hot , there both , as among the Tarbelli , an Aquitanian tribe , and in the Pyrenees , with only a short distance separating the two , in some places tepid and lukewarm , promising relief to the sick and bursting forth to help only men of all the animals .
Water adds to the number of the gods by its various names , and founds cities , such as Puteoli in Campania , Statiellae in Liguria , and Sextiae in the province of Narbonensis .
Nowhere however is water more bountiful than in the Bay of Baiae , or with more variety of relief : some has the virtue of sulphur , some of alum , some of salt , some of soda , some of bitumen , some are even acid and salt in combination ; of some the mere steam is beneficial , of which the power a is so great that it heats baths and even makes cold water boil in the tubs .
The water called Posidian in the region of Baiae , getting its name from a freedman of Claudius Caesar , cooks thoroughly even meat .
In the sea itself too , steam rises from the water that belonged to Licinius Crassus , and there comes something valuable to health in the very midst of the billows .
SOL To come now to the classes of water : some waters are good for sinews or feet , or for sciatica ; others for dislocations or fractures ; they purge the bowels ; heal wounds ; are specific for head , or for ears ; while the Ciceronian are so for the eyes .
It is worth while recording that there is a country seat on the coast as you go from Lake Avernus to Puteoli , with a famous portico and grove , which lvi .
Cicero , copying Athens , called Academia .
There he wrote the volumes called Academica , and in it he also erected memorials to himself , as though indeed he had not done so throughout the whole world .
In the front part of this estate , when the owner was Antistius Vetus , a short time after Cicero 's demise there burst out hot springs , very beneficial for eye complaints , which have been made famous by a poem of Laurea Tullus , who was one of Cicero 's freedmen .
From it we at once realize that even his servants drew inspiration from that mighty genius .
For I will quote the actual poem , which deserves to be read , not only on this site , but everywhere .
SOL ' O famous champion of our Latin tongue , where grows with a fairer green the grove you bade rise , and the villa , honoured by the name of Academe , Vetus keeps in repair under a more careful tendance , here are also to be seen waters not revealed before , which with drops infused relieve wearied eyes .
For indeed the site itself gave this gift as an honour to Cicero its master , when it disclosed springs with this healing power , so that , since he is read throughout the whole world , there may be more waters to give sight to eyes .
' SOL In Campania too are the waters of Sinuessa , which are said to cure barrenness in women and insanity in men .
SOL The waters in the island of Aenaria are said to cure stone in the bladder , as does also the water called Acidula — it is a cold one — four miles from Teanum Sidicinum , that at Stabiae called Dimidia , and the water of Venafrum from the spring Acidulus .
The same result comes from drinking the water of Lake Velia , also of the Syrian spring near Mount Taurus , according to Marcus Varro , and of the Phrygian river Gallus , according to Callimachus .
But here moderation is necessary in drinking lest it drive people to madness , which Ctesias writes those suffer from who drink of the Red Spring in Ethiopia .
SOL Near Rome the waters of Albula heal wounds .
These are lukewarm , but those of Cutilia of the Sabines are very cold , penetrating the body with a sort of suction , so that they might seem almost to bite , being very healthful to the stomach , the sinews , and the whole body .
SOL The spring at Thespiae causes women to conceive , as does the river Elatum in Arcadia , and the spring Linus , also in Arcadia , guards the embryo and prevents miscarriage .
The river in Pyrrha , on the contrary , that is called Aphrodisium , causes barrenness .
SOL The water of Lake Alphins removes psoriasis , Varro tells us , adding that Titius , an ex-praetor , as a result of this complaint had a face like that of a marble statue .
The Cydnus , a river of Cilicia , cures gout , as appears from a letter of Cassius of Parma to M .
Antonius .
On the other hand , it is the fault of the water in Troezen that everyone there suffers from diseases of the feet .
The Tungri , a state of Gaul , has a remarkable spring that sparkles with innumerable bubbles , with a taste of iron rust , which yet cannot be detected until the water has been drunk .
It is a purgative , and cures tertian agues and stone in the bladder .
This water also , if fire is brought near it , becomes turbid , and finally turns red .
White Earth Springs , between Puteoli and Naples , is good for complaints of the eyes and for wounds .
Cicero in his Book of Marvels alleges that only by marsh water of Reate are the hoofs of draught cattle hardened .
SOL Eudicus tells us that in Hestiaeotis are two springs : Cerona , which makes black the sheep that drink of it , and Neleus , which makes them white , while they are mottled if they drink of each .
Theophrastus says that at Thurii the Crathis makes oxen and sheep white , and the Sybaris makes them black .
SOL He adds that men too are affected by this difference : that those who drink of the Sybaris are darker and more hardy , and with curly hair , while those who drink of the Crathis are fair , softer , and with straight hair .
He also says that in Macedonia those who wish white young to be born lead their beasts to the Haliacmon , but to the Axius if they wish the young to be black or dark .
The same authority adds that in certain places all produce grows to be dark , even grain and vegetables , as among the Messapii , and that in a certain spring at Lusi in Arcadia land mice live and dwell .
At Erythrae the river Axios makes hair grow on the body .
SOL In Boeotia by the temple of Trophonius near the river Hercynnus are two springs ; one brings remembrance , the other forgetfulness ; hence the names that have been given them .
SOL In Cilicia near the town Cescum flows the river Nuus .
Those that drink of it become , says Marcus Varro , of keener perception , but on the island of Cea there is a spring that makes men dull , and at Zama in Africa is one that gives the drinkers a tuneful voice .
SOL Disgust at wine , says Eudoxus , comes upon those who have drunk of Lake Clitorius , but Theopompus says that drunkenness is caused by the springs that I have mentioned , and Mucianus that at Andros , from the spring of Father Liber , on fixed seven-day festivals of this god , flows wine , but if its water is carried out of sight of the temple the taste turns to that of water .
SOL Polyclitus says that with the river Liparis near Soli in Cilicia people are anointed , Theophrastus says this of a spring with the same name in Ethiopia , and Lycos that among the Oratae of India is a spring the water of which keeps lamps burning bright .
The same is said of one at Ecbatana .
Theopompus says that among the people of Scotussa is a lake that heals wounds .
Juba says that among the Trogodytae is a lake called Insanus , so named from its evil character , for three times a day and three times each night it becomes bitter , and then again fresh , full of white serpents twenty cubits long ; he also says that in Arabia is a spring that bursts forth with such violence that it throws out everything , no matter how heavy , that is heaved into it .
SOL Theophrastus tells us that a spring of Marsyas in Phrygia , near the town of Celaenae , casts out rocks .
Not far from it are two springs , named Claeon and Gelon , so called from the force of their Greek names .
A spring at Cyzicus is called Cupid 's Spring ; those who drink of it , Mucianus believes , lose their amorous desires .
SOL In Crannon is a hot spring which just falls short of boiling , the water of which with wine added remains in vessels a hot drink for three days .
There are also in Germany across the Rhine the hot springs of Mattiaion , a draught from which is boiling hot for three days ; around the borders indeed the water forms pumice .
SOL But if anybody thinks that some of these statements are incredible , he has to learn that in no sphere does Nature show greater marvels , although in the early parts of my work I have mentioned plenty of examples .
Ctesias tells us that there is in India standing water called Silasp in which nothing floats but everything sinks to the bottom ; Coelius says in our Avernus even leaves sink , and Varro that the birds that fly to it die .
On the other hand , in the African lake Apuscidamus everything floats and nothing sinks ; similarly in the Sicilian spring Phinthia , as Apion tells us , and among the Medes in the lake and well of Saturn .
Again , the source of the river Limyra often crosses to neighbouring districts , indicating some portent , and a wonderful thing is that the fish cross with it .
The inhabitants seek responses from them , offering food .
To give a favourable answer the fish snap it up ; but for an unfavourable one , they knock it away with their tails .
The river Alcas in Bithynia flows by Bryazus — this is the name both of a god and of his temple — the current of which perjured persons are said to be unable to endure , as it burns like a flame .
In Cantabria the springs of the Tamaris are supposed to be prophetic .
Three in number they are eight feet apart , uniting in one channel to form a vast river .
Each one dries up for periods of twelve , occasionally of twenty days , without the slightest trace of water , although there is a copious spring near them that never dries up .
It is an evil portent if those wishing to look at them find them not flowing , as recently Larcius Licinius , a legate pro-praetore discovered after seven days .
In Judea is a stream that dries up every Sabbath .
SOL On the other hand some other marvels are deadly .
Ctesias writes that in Armenia is a spring in which are dark fish that , eaten as food , bring instant death , as I have heard do the fish also from the water around the rising of the Danube , until a spring is reached close to the main channel , where the fish of this sort go no further .
At this point , therefore , report says is the real source of that river .
They tell us that this same phenomenon occurs in Lydia in the marsh of the Nymphs .
In Arcadia near the Pheneus there flows from the rocks a stream called Styx , which I have said proves instantly fatal to life , but Theophrastus tells us that in it are small fish equally deadly ; no other kind of poisonous spring is like this .
Theopompus also says that near Cychri in Thrace are deadly waters , Lycos that at Leontini is water that kills on the third day after drinking , and Varro that on Soracte is poisonous water in a spring four feet wide .
At sunrise , he adds , this bubbles out as though it boiled , and birds that have tasted it lie dead close by .
For certain waters have also this insidious property , that the very prospect is attractive ; as at Nonacris in Arcadia , which has nothing at all about it to serve as a warning .
They think that this water harms by its excessive cold , seeing that as it flows it itself turns to stone .
It is otherwise around Tempe in Thessaly , for its poison is a terror to everyone , and they tell us that by the water there even bronze and iron are corroded .
It flows , as I have pointed out , for only a short distance , and a marvellous thing is related of this spring : it is embraced by the roots of a wild carob always bearing purple blossom .
And a unique kind of herb flourishes on the margins of the spring .
In Macedonia , not far from the tomb of the poet Euripides , two streams join , one very wholesome to drink , the other a deadly poison .
SOL At Perperena is a spring that turns to stone whatever land it irrigates , as do also the hot waters at Aedepsus in Euboea , for , whatever rocks the stream reaches increase in height .
At Eurymenae chaplets , thrown into a spring , turn to stone .
At Colossae is a river , and bricks when cast into it are of stone when taken out .
In Scyros in the mine all the trees watered by the river are turned to rock , branches and all .
Drops too dripping from the stone harden in certain caves , and hence these are concave in shape .
But at Mieza in Macedonia the drops actually hang from the arched roofs , while in the Corinthian cave they petrify after falling ; in certain caverns the stone forms in both ways and makes pillars , as at Phausia in the Chersonesus opposite to Rhodes in a huge cave , where the pillars are actually of different colours to look at .
These examples must be enough for the present .
SOL It is a question debated by the physicians what kinds of water are most beneficial .
They rightly condemn stagnant and sluggish waters , holding that running water is more beneficial , as it is made finer and more healthy by the mere agitation of the current .
For this reason I am surprised that some physicians recommend highly water from cisterns .
But these physicians put forward a reason ; the lightest water , they say , is rainwater , seeing that it has been able to rise and to be suspended in the atmosphere .
Therefore they also prefer snow and ice even more than snow , as though its texture were rarefied to the utmost ; for , they say , snow and ice are lighter than water , and ice much lighter .
To refute this view is a matter that is important to all men .
For first of all , this lightness of water can be discovered with difficulty except by sensation , as the kinds of water differ practically nothing in weight .
Nor is it proof of the lightness of rain water that it rose to the sky , since even stones are seen to do the same , and as it falls it is infected with exhalations from the earth .
Hence it comes about that rainwater is found to be full of dirt , for which reason this water becomes hot very quickly .
That snow indeed and ice should be considered the finest form of that element makes me wonder , when I have before me the evidence of hailstones , to drink the water of which it is agreed is most unwholesome .
Not a few physicians however themselves maintain that hail and snow on the contrary make very unhealthy drink , since there has been taken from it what was its thinnest part .
Certainly it is found that every liquid becomes smaller when frozen , that too much dew brings blight , and hoar frost blast , effects caused by snow also being akin .
Rainwater , it is agreed , becomes putrid very quickly , and it is the worst water to stand a voyage .
Epigenes , however , says that water which has become putrid and been purified seven times becomes putrid no more .
But cistern water even physicians admit is harmful to the bowels and throat because of its hardness , and no other water contains more slime or disgusting insects .
Yet it must be admitted , they hold , that river water is not ipso facto the most wholesome , nor yet that of any torrent whatsoever , while there are very many lakes that are wholesome .
What water then , and of what kind , is the best ?
It varies with the locality .
The kings of Parthia drink only of the Choaspes and the Eulaeus ; water from these rivers is taken with them even into distant regions .
But it is clear that the water of these rivers does not find favour just because they are rivers , for the kings do not drink from the Tigris , Euphrates , or many other rivers .
SOL Slime in water is bad .
If however the same river is full of eels , it is held to be a sign of wholesomeness , as it is of coldness for worms to breed in a spring .
But before all are condemned bitter waters , and those that give a full feeling immediately after drinking , as does the water at Troezen .
But the nitrous and salty-acid streams that in the desert flow to the Red Sea are made sweet within two hours if pearl barley is added , and the barley itself they eat .
Especially are condemned waters that have mud at their source , and those that give a bad colour to those who drink of them .
It also makes a difference if water stains bronze vessels , or if it cooks greens slowly , if when gently filtered out it leaves a sediment of earth , or when boiled thickly encrusts the vessel .
Not only too is fetid water bad , but also that which tastes of anything at all , though the taste may be pleasant and agreeable , or , as often happens , approaching that of milk .
Wholesome water ought to be very like air .
In the whole world one spring of water only is said to have a pleasant smell , and that is at Chabura in Mesopotamia ; a reason is sought in the legend that with it Juno was bathed .
Apart from this wholesome water should have no sort of taste or smell .
SOL Some judge the wholesomeness of water by means of the balance .
This is wasted carefulness , for it is very rare for one water to be lighter than another .
A more reliable and a delicate test is that , other things being equal , a water is better that becomes warm and cool more quickly .
Moreover we are told that if drawn in vessels [ without being weighed , or without being warmed by the hand ] and placed on the ground , the better water becomes warm .
From what source then shall we obtain the most commendable water ?
From wells surely , as I see they are generally used in towns , but they should be those the water of which by frequent withdrawals is kept in constant motion , and those where due thinness is obtained by filtering through the earth .
For wholesomeness so much suffices ; for coolness both shade is necessary and that the well should be open to the air .
One point above all must be observed — and this is also important for a continuous flow — well water should issue from the bottom , not the sides .
But coolness to the touch can also be obtained artificially , if the water is forced aloft or let fall from a height , beating and absorbing the air .
In swimming indeed the same water is felt to be cooler by those who hold their breath .
It was a discovery of the Emperor Nero to boil water and cool it in a glass vessel by thrusting it into snow .
In this way is obtained a pleasant coolness without the injurious qualities of snow .
At any rate it is agreed that all water is more serviceable when boiled , and that water which has been heated can be cooled to a greater degree — a most clever discovery .
It purifies bad water to boil it down to one half .
Cold water taken internally checks bleeding , and to hold it in the mouth prevents overheating in the bath .
Water that is very cold to swallow is not always so to the touch ; this good quality alternates as many find out by personal experience .
SOL The first prize for the coolest and most wholesome water in the whole world has been awarded by the voice of Rome to the Aqua Marcia , one of the gods' gifts to our city .
This was once called the Aqua Aufeia , and the source itself Aqua Pitonia .
It rises at the extreme end of the Paelignian range , crosses the country of the Marsi and the Fucine lake , plainly making straight for Rome .
Next it sinks into the underground caves near Tibur , reappearing and completing its journey of nine more miles along an aqueduct .
The first to begin the bringing of this water to Rome was one of the kings , Ancus Marcius ; later , repairs were carried out by Quintus Marcius Rex in his praetorship , and again by Marcus Agrippa .
SOL The same Agrippa also brought the Aqua Virgo to Rome from the byroad , eight miles away , that extends two miles along the road to Praeneste .
Nearby is the stream of Hercules , and because the Aqua Virgo runs away from this it was so named .
A comparison of these rivers illustrates the difference mentioned above ; for the Aqua Marcia is as much superior to swallow as the Aqua Virgo is cool to touch .
And yet Rome has long since lost the delights of each , for love of display and greed have diverted these means of public health to country seats and suburbs .
SOL It would be pertinent to add the method of searching for water .
It is found mostly in enclosed valleys , and what may be called the hinge of converging slopes , or at the foot of mountains .
Many have thought that everywhere the northern are the watery slopes .
On this matter it would be well to point out the variableness of Nature .
In the Hyrcanian mountains it does not rain on the southern slope , and so only on the north side are there woods .
But Olympus , Ossa , Parnassus , the Apennines , and the Alps , are everywhere covered with trees and watered by rivers ; others are so only on the south side , as are the White Mountains in Crete .
So in this matter there will be no unvarying rule to follow .
SOL Signs of the presence of water are rushes , the plant about which I have spoken , and frogs squatting on their chest in great numbers for any one place .
For wild willow , alder , vitex , reed , or ivy , which grow spontaneously and where there is a settling of rainwater flowing from higher regions to one lower down , are deceptive indications ; one much more reliable is a misty steam , visible from a distance before sunrise , for which some water-finders watch from a height , lying prone with their chin touching the earth .
There is also a special sign , known only to experts , which they look for in the hottest season and in the most blazing heat of the day , the nature of the reflection that shines from each locality .
For if one spot looks moister while the earth around is parching , that is an infallible sign .
But so great is the necessary strain on the eyes that pain results .
To avoid this strain they have recourse to other tests .
They dig a hole to the depth of five feet , covering it with jars of unbaked potters' clay , or else with a well-oiled bronze basin , and also a burning lamp arched over with foliage and earth on top ; if the clay is found to be wet or broken , or if moisture covers the bronze , or the lamp goes out without any failure of oil , or perchance a flock of wool is wet , then the finding of water is assured .
Some also light a fire first and dry the hole , making yet more conclusive the evidence of the vessels .
SOL The earth however itself guarantees water by white spots or by being green all over .
For in black earth the springs are generally not permanent .
Potters clay always dashes hopes of water , and further well-digging ceases when it is observed that the earth 's strata begin with black and go down in the order given above .
Water in clay is always sweet , but cooler in tufa .
For tufa too is commended , for it makes water sweet and very light ; acting as a strainer it keeps back any dirt .
Loam indicates scanty trickles with shine , gravel intermittent springs but of a good flavour , male loam or carbunculus-sand ; continuous streams , steady and wholesome ; red rock points to the certain presence of excellent water ; the rocky bases of mountains , or flint , point to the same kind of water , with great coolness in addition .
But as the diggers go deeper , the clods should prove continually moister , and the spades cut down more easily .
When wells have been sunk deep , the well-diggers are killed if they meet with sulphurous or aluminous fumes .
A test for this danger is to let down a lighted lamp and see if it goes out .
If it does , vent-holes are sunk at the side of the well , on the right and on the left , to take off the oppressive gas .
Apart from these injurious substances , mere depth makes the air oppressive ; it is dissipated by continuous fanning with linen cloths .
When water has been reached , walls are built from the bottom no cement being used lest the springs be dammed up .
Some water , the source of which is not at a height , is cooler right from the beginning of spring — for it is made up of winter rain — some is cooler after the rising of the Dog-star ; in Macedonia at Pella are both kinds .
For before the town there is a marsh stream that is cold at the beginning of summer ; then in the higher parts of the town the water is very cold even in the height of summer .
A similar phenomenon occurs in Chios also , the relative position of harbour and town being the same .
At Athens , Enneacrunos in a cloudy summer is cooler than the well in the Garden of Juppiter , while this latter is very cold during summer droughts .
Wells however generally run dry about Arcturus , not in the actual summer , and all sink low during the four days of its rising .
Moreover many wells fail throughout the winter , as those around Olynthus , the water returning first in the spring .
In Sicily indeed , in the region of Messana and Mylae , springs in winter dry up altogether , but in the actual summer overflow and form rivers .
At Apollonia in Pontus a spring near the sea is flooded only in summer , and especially about the rising of the Dog-star , but less so if the summer is colder than usual .
Certain lands become drier in rainy weather , as the region of Narnia ; Marcus Cicero included this in his Marvels , saying that drought brings mud , and rain dust .
SOL All water is sweeter in winter , in summer less so , in autumn least , and less during droughts .
The taste of rivers is usually variable , owing to the great difference in river beds .
For waters vary with the land over which they flow , and with the juices of the plants they wash .
Therefore the same rivers are found in some parts to be unwholesome .
Tributaries too alter the flavour of a river , as do those of the Borysthenes , and being absorbed are diluted .
Some rivers indeed are also changed by rain .
Three times it has happened in the Bosphorus that salt rains fell and ruined the crops , and three times rains have made bitter the inundations of the Nile , a great plague for Egypt .
SOL Springs arise often when woods have been cut down , being used up before as sustenance for the trees ; this happened when Cassander was besieging the Gauls after the woods on Mount Haemus had been felled by them to make a rampart .
Often indeed devastating torrents unite when from hills has been cut away the wood that used to hold the rains and absorbs them .
It also improves the water supply for the earth to he dug and tilled , and for the hard surface crust to be broken up .
It is at any rate reported that in Crete , when a town called Arcadia had been stormed , the many springs and rivers of that region went dry , and six years afterwards , when the town was rebuilt , they reappeared , as each piece of land came under cultivation .
Earthquakes too make water break out or swallow it up , for example , as is well known , around Pheneus in Arcadia this has happened five times .
Thus too on Mount Coryeus a river burst out , but afterwards came to be tilled ground .
Any change is startling when no obvious reason for it is to be seen .
In Magnesia for instance hot water became cold but its salty flavour remained unaltered ; while in Caria , where the temple of Neptune is , a river which before had been sweet was changed to salt .
The following phenomena too are very wonderful : the Arethusa at Syracuse smells of dung during the Olympian games , a likely thing , for the Alpheus crosses to that island under the bed of the seas .
A spring in the Rhodian Chersonesus pours out refuse every ninth year .
The colour too of water changes , for example at Babylon a lake in summer has red water for eleven days , and the Borysthenes at fixed intervals flows with a blue colour , although of all waters it is the thinnest , and for that reason flows above the Hypanis .
Wherein is another marvel : when south winds blow the Hypanis goes above .
But other evidence for the thinness of the Borysthenes is that it gives out no exhalation , not to say no mist .
Those who wish to be thought careful enquirers into these matters say that water becomes heavier after the winter solstice .
SOL For the rest , the best way for water to be brought from a spring is in earthenware pipes two fingers thick , the joints boxed together so that the upper pipe fits into the lower , and smoothed with quicklime and oil .
The gradient of the water should be at least a quarter of an inch every hundred feet ; should it come in a tunnel , there must be vent holes every two actus .
When water is required to form a jet , it should come in lead pipes .
Water rises as high as its source .
If it comes from a long distance , the pipe should frequently go up and down , so that no momentum may be lost .
The usual length for a piece of piping is ten feet ; five-finger lengths should weigh 60 pounds , eight-finger lengths 100 pounds , ten-finger lengths 120 pounds , and so on in proportion .
A ten-finger pipe is so called when the breadth of the strip before bending is ten fingers , and one half as large a five-finger pipe .
At every bend of a hill where the momentum must be controlled , it is necessary to use a five-finger pipe ; reservoirs must be made according as circumstances require .
SOL I wonder that Homer made no mention of hot springs , and that though he frequently speaks of hot baths , the reason being that modern hydropathie treatment was not then a part of medicine .
Sulphur waters , however , are good for the sinews , alum waters for paralysis and similar cases of collapse , waters containing bitumen and soda , such as that of Cutilia , are good for drinking and as a purge .
Many people make a matter of boasting the great number of hours they can endure the heat of these sulphur waters — a very injurious practice , for one should remain in them a little longer than in the bath , afterwards rinse in cool , fresh water , and not go away without a rubbing with oil .
The common people find these details irksome , and so there is no greater risk to health than this treatment , because an overpowering smell goes to the head , which sweats and is seized with chill , while the rest of the body is immersed .
Those make a like mistake who boast of the great quantity they can drink .
I have seen some already swollen with drinking to such an extent that their rings were covered by skin , since they could not void the vast amount of water they had swallowed .
So it is not good to drink these waters without a frequent taste of salt .
The mud too of medicinal springs is used with advantage , but the application should be dried in the sun .
We must not think , however , that all hot waters are medicinal ; for there are those at Segesta in Sicily , at Larisa in the Troad , at Magnesia , in Melos and Lipara .
Nor is the discoloration of bronze or silver a proof , as many have thought , of medicinal properties , since there are none in the springs of Patavium .
Between medicinal and other water there is not even a difference of smell to be detected .
SOL The same method of treatment will also apply to sea water , which is used hot for pains in the sinews , for joining fractured bones , and for bruised bones ; also for drying the body , in which treatment cold sea water is also employed .
There are besides many other uses , the chief however being a sea voyage for those attacked by consumption , as I have said , and for haemoptysis , such as quite recently within our memory was taken by Annaeus Gallio after his consulship .
Egypt is not chosen for its own sake , but because of the length of the voyage .
Moreover the mere seasickness caused by rolling and pitching are good for very many ailments of the head , eyes , and chest , as well as for all complaints for which hellebore is given .
Sea water indeed by itself physicians think to be more efficacious for dispersing tumours , if with it a decoction is made of barley meal for parotid swellings .
It is also an ingredient of plasters , especially white plasters and poultices .
It is beneficially used too when poured over in frequent douches .
It is also drunk , though not without harm to the stomach , for purging the body and for getting rid of black bile or clotted blood by vomit or stool .
Some have also given it to be drunk in quartan agues , in tenesmus , and for diseased joints , keeping it for this purpose , for age takes away its injurious qualities .
Some boil it ; all draw it up out at sea , use it unspoiled by any addition of fresh water , and in using this remedy prefer that an emetic should precede the draught .
Then also they mix with the water vinegar or wine .
Those who have given it pure , recommend to eat afterwards radishes with oxymel to provoke further vomiting .
Sea water warmed is also injected as an enema .
Nothing is preferred to it for fomenting swollen testicles , or for bad chilblains before ulceration ; similarly for itching , psoriasis , and the treatment of lichen .
Nits too and foul vermin on the head are treated with sea water .
It also restores the natural colour to livid patches .
In this treatment it is of very great advantage to foment with hot vinegar after the sea water .
It is moreover known to be healing for poisonous stings , as of spiders and scorpions , and for persons wetted by the spittle of the asp , but for these purposes it is employed hot .
Steam from sea water and vinegar is beneficial for headaches .
Colic too and cholera are relieved by warm enemas of seawater .
Things warmed by it are harder to cool thoroughly .
Swollen breasts , the viscera , and emaciation , are rectified by sea baths , deafness and headache by the vapour of boiling sea water and vinegar .
Sea water removes very quickly rust from iron , heals too scab on sheep , and softens wool .
SOL I am well aware that to inland dwellers these remarks may appear superfluous , but research has provided for this also by discovering a method whereby every man may make sea water for himself .
In this method there is one strange feature : if more than a sextarius of salt is dropped into four sextarii of water , the water is overpowered , and the salt does not dissolve .
However , a sextarius of salt and four sextarii of water give the strength and properties of the saltest sea .
But it is thought that the most reasonable proportion is to compound the measure of water given above with eight cyathi of salt .
This mixture warms the sinews without chafing the skin .
SOL What is called thalassomeli is a mixture , kept till old , of sea water , honey , and rain water in equal proportions .
For this purpose too the water is brought from out at sea , and the mixture is stored in an earthenware vessel lined with pitch .
It is good especially for purges , does not disturb the stomach , and has a pleasant flavour and smell .
SOL Hydromel too is a mixture once prepared from pure rainwater and honey , to be given as a less injurious drink to patients who craved for wine .
It has been condemned now for many years a as having all the faults of wine with none of its advantages .
SOL Because those at sea often suffer from the failure of fresh water , I shall describe ways meeting this difficulty .
If spread around a ship , fleeces become moist by absorption of evaporated sea water , and from them can be squeezed water which is fresh .
Again , hollow wax balls , let down into the sea in nets , or empty vessels with their mouth sealed , collect fresh water inside .
But on land sea water is made fresh by filtering through clay .
Dislocated limbs of both man and quadrupeds are very easily reset by swimming in any kind of water .
Travellers too are sometimes afraid lest unknown water should endanger their health .
A precaution against this danger is to drink the suspected water cold immediately on leaving the bath .
SOL An application of moss that has grown in water is good for gout , and mixed with oil for painful and swollen ankles .
Rubbing with foam of water removes warts , as does also sand of the sea shores , especially fine sand whitened by the sun ; it is used in medicine as a covering for drying the bodies of patients suffering from dropsy or catarrhs .
So much for waters ; now for the products of water .
I shall begin , as elsewhere , with the chief of them , that is , with salts and sponge .
SOL All salt is artificial or native ; each is formed in several ways , but there are two agencies , condensation or drying up of water .
It is dried out of the Tarentine lake by summer sun , when the whole pool turns into salt , although it is always shallow , never exceeding knee height , likewise in Sicily from a lake , called Cocanicus , and from another near Gela .
Of these the edges only dry up ; in Phrygia , Cappadocia , and at Aspendus , the evaporation is wider , in fact right to the centre .
There is yet another wonderful thing about it : the same amount is restored during the night as is taken away during the day .
All salt from pools is fine powder , and not in blocks .
Another kind produced from sea water spontaneously is foam left on the edge of the shore and on rocks .
All this is condensation from drift , and that found on rocks has the sharper taste .
There are also three different kinds of native salt ; for in Bactra are two vast lakes , one facing the Scythians , the other the Arii , which exude salt , while at Citium in Cyprus and around Memphis salt is taken out of a lake and then dried in the sun .
But the surface too of rivers may condense into salt , the rest of the stream flowing as it were under ice , as near the Caspian Gates are what are called ' rivers of salt ,' also around the Mardi and the Armenians .
Moreover , in Bactria too the rivers Ochus and Oxus bring down scrapings of salt from nearby mountains .
There are also lakes in Africa , and that muddy ones , which carry salt .
Indeed hot springs too carry it , such as those at Pagasae .
So much for the different kinds of salt which come , as natural products , from waters .
There are also mountains of natural salt , salt .
such as Oromenus in India , where it is cut out like blocks of stone from a quarry , and ever replaces itself , bringing greater revenues to the rajahs than those from gold and pearls .
It is also dug out of the earth in Cappadocia , being evidently formed by condensation of moisture .
Here indeed it is split into sheets like mica ; the blocks are very heavy , nicknamed by the people ' grains .
' At Gerra , a town of Arabia , the walls and houses are made of blocks of salt cemented with water .
Near Pelusium too King Ptolemy found salt when he was making a camp .
This led afterwards to the discovery of salt by digging away the sand even in the rough tracts between Egypt and Arabia , as it is also found as far as the oracle of Hammon through the parched deserts of Africa , where at night it increases as the moon waxes .
But the region of Cyrenaica too is famous for Hammoniac salt , itself so called because it is found under the sand .
It is in colour like the alum called schiston , consisting of long opaque slabs , of an unpleasant flavour , but useful in medicine .
That is most valued which is most transparent and splits into straight flakes .
A remarkable feature is reported of it : of very little weight in its underground pits , when brought into the light of day it becomes incredibly heavy .
The reason is obvious ; the damp breath of the pits helps the workers by supporting the weight as does water .
It is adulterated by the Sicilian salt I have said comes from the lake Cocanicus , as well as by Cyprian salt , which is wonderfully like it .
In Hither Spain too at Egelesta salt is cut into almost transparent blocks ; to this for some time past most physicians have given the first place among all kinds of salt .
Every region in which salt is found is barren , and nothing will grow there .
To speak generally , these remarks about the various kinds of native salt are comprehensive .
Of artificial salt there are various kinds .
The usual one , and the most plentiful , is made in salt pools by running into them sea water not without streams of fresh water , but rain helps very much , and above all much warm sunshine , without which it does not dry out .
In Africa around Utica are formed heaps of salt like hills ; when they have hardened under sun and moon , they are not melted by any moisture , and even iron cuts them with difficulty .
It is also however made in Crete without fresh water by letting the sea flow into the pools , and around Egypt by the sea itself , which penetrates the soil , soaked as I believe it is , by the Nile .
Salt is also made by pouring water from wells into salt pools .
At Babylon the first condensation solidifies into a liquid bitumen like oil , which is also used in lamps .
When this is taken away , salt is underneath .
In Cappadocia too they bring water into salt pools from wells and a spring .
In Chaonia there is a spring , from which they boil water , and on cooling obtain a salt that is insipid and not white .
In the provinces of Gaul and Germany they pour salt water on burning logs .
SOL ( In one part of the provinces of Spain they draw the brine from wells and call it maria .
) The former indeed think that the wood used also makes a difference .
The best is oak , for its pure ash by itself has the properties of salt ; in some places hazel finds favour .
So when brine is poured on it even wood turns into salt .
Whenever wood is used in its making salt is dark .
I find in Theophrastus that the Umbrians were wont to boil down in water the ash of reeds and rushes , until only a very little liquid remained .
Moreover , from the liquor of salted foods salt is recovered by reboiling , and when evaporation is complete its saline character is regained .
It is generally thought that the salt obtained from sardine brine is the most pleasant .
SOL Of sea salt the most in favour comes from Salamis in Cyprus , of pool salt that from Tarentum and that from Phrygia which is called Tattaean .
The last two are useful for the eyes .
The salt imported from Cappadocia in little bricks is said to impart a gloss to the skin .
But the salt I have said comes from Citium a smoothes the skin better , and so after childbirth it is applied with melanthium to the abdomen .
The saltest salt is the driest , the most agreeable and whitest of all is the Tarentine ; for the rest , it is the whitest that is the most friable .
All salt is made sweet by rainwater , more agreeable , however , by dew , but plentiful by gusts of north wind .
It does not form under a south wind .
Flower of salt forms only with north winds .
Tragasaean salt and Acanthian , so named after towns , neither crackles nor sputters in a fire , nor does froth of any salt , or scrapings , or powder .
Salt of Agrigentum submits to fire and sputters in water .
The colour too of salt varies : blushing red at Memphis , tawny red near the Oxus , purple at Centuripae , it is of such brightness near Gela ( also in Sicily ) that it reflects an image .
In Cappadoeia salt is quarried of a saffron colour , transparent , and very fragrant .
For medicinal purposes the ancients used to favour most highly Tarentine salt , next , all kinds of sea salt , and of these especially that from foam , while for the eyes of draught animals and cattle salt of Tragasa and Baetica .
To season meats and foods the most useful otter one melts easily and is rather moist , for it is less bitter , such as that of Attica and Euboea .
For preserving meat the more suitable salt is sharp and dry , like that of Megara .
A conserve too is made with fragrant additions , which is used as a relish , creating and sharpening an appetite for every kind of food , so that in innumerable seasonings it is the taste of salt that predominates , and it is looked for when we eat garum .
Moreover sheep , cattle , and draught animals are encouraged to pasture in particular by salt ; the supply of milk is much more copious , and there is even a far more pleasing quality in the cheese .
Therefore , Heaven knows , a civilized life is impossible without salt , and so necessary is this basic substance that its name is applied metaphorically even to intense mental pleasures .
We call them sales ( wit ) ; all the humour of life , its supreme joyousness , and relaxation after toil , are expressed by this word more than by any other .
It has a place in magistracies also and on service abroad , from which comes the term ' salary ' ( salt money ) ; it had great importance among the men of old , as is clear from the name of the Salarian Way , since by it , according to agreement , salt was imported to the Sabines .
King Ancus Marcius gave a largess to the people of 6,000 bushels of salt , and was the first to construct salt pools .
Varro too is our authority that the men of old used salt as a relish , and that they ate salt with their bread is clear from a proverb !
But the clearest proof of its importance lies in the fact that no sacrifice is carried out without the mola salsa ( salted meal ) .
SOL Salt-pools have reached their highest degree of purity in what may be called embers of salt , which is the lightest and whitest of its kind .
' Flower of salt ' is also a name given to an entirely different thing , with a moister nature and a saffron or red colour , a kind of salt rust ; it has an unpleasant smell , like that of garum , and is different from salt , not only from foam salt .
Egypt discovered it , and it appears to be brought down by the Nile .
It also however floats on the surface of certain springs .
The best kind of it yields a sort of oily fat , for there is , surprising as it may seem , a fat even in salt .
It is adulterated too and coloured by red ochre , or usually by ground crockery ; this sham is detected by water , which washes out the artificial colour , while the genuine is only removed by oil , and perfumers use it very commonly because of its colour .
In vessels the whiteness is seen on the surface , but the inner part , as I have said , is moister .
The nature of flower of salt is acrid , heating , bad for the stomach , sudorific , aperient when taken in wine and water , and useful for anodynes and detergents .
It also removes hair from eyelids .
The sediment is shaken up in order to restore the saffron colour .
Besides these salines there is also what is called at the salt-pools salpugo , or sometimes salsilago .
It is entirely liquid , differing from sea brine by its more salty character .
SOL There is yet another kind of choice liquor , called garum , consisting of the guts of fish and the other parts that would otherwise be considered refuse ; these are soaked in salt , so that garum is really liquor from the putrefaction of these matters .
Once this used to be made from a fish that the Greeks called garos ; they showed that by fumigation with its burning head the afterbirth was brought away .
Today the most popular garum is made from the scomber in the fisheries of Carthago Spartaria — it is called garum of the allies — one thousand sesterces being exchanged for about two congii of the fish .
Scarcely any other liquid except unguents has come to be more highly valued , bringing fame even to the nations that make it .
The scomber is caught also in Mauretania and at Carteia in Baetica ; the scomber enters the Mediterranean from the Atlantic , but it is used only for making garum .
Clazomenae too is famous for garum , and so are Pompeii and Leptis , just as Antipolis and Thurii are for muria , and today too also Delmatia .
SOL Allex is sediment of garum , the dregs , neither whole nor strained .
It has , however , also begun to be made separately from a tiny fish , otherwise of no use .
The Romans call it apua , the Greeks aphye , because this tiny fish is bred out of rain .
The people of Forum Julii call lupus ( wolf ) the fish from which they make garum .
Then allex became a luxury , and its various kinds have come to be innumerable ; garum for instance has been blended to the colour of old honey wine , and to a taste so pleasant that it can be drunk .
But another kind of garum is devoted to superstitious sex-abstinence and Jewish rites , and is made from fish without scales .
Thus allex has come to be made from oysters , sea urchins , sea anemones , and mullet 's liver , and salt to be corrupted in numberless ways so as to suit all palates .
These incidental remarks must suffice for the luxurious tastes of civilized man .
Allen however itself is of some use in healing .
For allex both cures itch in sheep , being poured into an incision in the skin , and is a good antidote for the bites of dog or sea draco ; it is applied on pieces of lint .
By garum too are fresh burns healed , if it is poured over them without mentioning garum .
It is also good for dog-bites and especially those of the crocodile , and for spreading or foul ulcers .
For ulcers too or pains in mouth or ears it is wonderfully good .
Muria too or the salsugo I spoke of is astringent , biting , reducing and drying , useful for dysentery , even if there is ulceration of the bowels .
It is injected for sciatica and chronic coeliac disease .
Among inland peoples it also takes the place of sea water for fomentations .
SOL The nature of salt is of itself fiery , and yet it is hostile to fires , fleeing from them , corroding all things , but astringent to the body , drying it and binding , preserving corpses also from corruption so that they last for ages ; in medicine however it is mordent , caustic , cleansing , reducing , and resolvent , injurious only to the stomach except in so far as it stimulates the appetite .
For the bites of serpents it is used with origanum , honey , and hyssop , for the cerastes with origanum and cedar resin , or pitch , or honey .
It is helpful for bite of the scolopendra if taken internally with vinegar , for scorpion stings if applied in oil or vinegar with a fourth part of linseed , but for hornets , wasps , and similar creatures , in vinegar only , for migraine , ulcers on the head , blisters , pimples , and incipient warts , with veal suet .
It is also used in eye remedies , for excrescences of flesh there , and for pterygia anywhere on the body , but especially on the eyes , and so it is an ingredient of eye salves and plasters ; for these purposes Tattaean salt or that of Cannus is the most approved .
For eyes bloodshot from a blow , however , and for bruised eyes , it is used with an equal weight of myrrh and with honey , or with hyssop in warm water , and the eyes should be fomented with salsugo .
For these purposes Spanish salt is chosen .
For cataract it is ground in a little stone mortar with milk ; for bruises a specific is salt wrapped in linen , dipped frequently in boiling water , and applied ; for running ulcers in the mouth it is applied in lint ; it is rubbed on swollen gums , and for roughness of the tongue it is broken and ground up fine .
They say that teeth neither rot nor decay if one daily while fasting in the morning keeps a piece of salt under the tongue until it melts .
It also cures leprous sores , boils , lichen and psoriasis , used with stoned raisons , beef suet origanum , and leaven or bread ; for these purposes and for pruritus Theban salt is mostly chosen .
For diseased tonsils and uvula salt with honey is beneficial .
For quinsy any salt is good , but all the more when oil and vinegar are added , while at the same time salt and liquid pitch are applied externally to the throat .
Mixed with wine salt also softens the belly , and taken in wine drives out harmlessly the various kinds of worms .
Placed under the tongue salt enables convalescents to endure the heat of the bath .
Pains of the sinews , especially in the region of the shoulders and kidneys , are relieved by salt in bags , kept hot by frequent dipping into boiling water ; colitis , griping and sciatica by taking salt in drink and by hot applications in the same kind of bags ; gout by salt pounded with flour , honey , and oil .
Herein is especially applicable the saying that for the whole body nothing is more beneficial than salt and sun .
Accordingly we see that the bodies of fishermen are horny , but the above remark should be applied especially to gout .
It also removes corns on the feet and chilblains .
It is applied to burns in oil or chewed .
It cheeks blisters , but for erysipelas and for creeping ulcers vinegar or hyssop is added , for carcinomata taminian grapes , while for phagedaenic ulcers it is roasted with barley meal , a linen cloth being placed on top , soaked in wine .
Sufferers from jaundice are helped by rubbing with salt , oil , and vinegar before a fire until they sweat ; this relieves the itching caused by this disease .
Oil should be used in cases of fatigue .
Many have treated dropsy too with salt , rubbed with salt and oil hot feverish patients , stayed a chronic cough by licking it , injected salt enemas into sufferers from sciatica , applied it to swollen or festering ulcers , and treated crocodile bites by salt and vinegar in lint cloths , taking care first to flog ' the sores with them .
Salt is taken in oxymel for poisoning by poppy-juice , with flour and honey it is applied to dislocations , and also to tumours .
Fomenting with salt and vinegar , or an application of salt and resin , is good for toothache .
But for all purposes foam of salt is more pleasant and more beneficial .
Salt however of any kind is added to anodynes for a warming effect , also to detergents for stretching and smoothing the skin .
An application of salt removes itch-scab in sheep and oxen ; salt is also given to be licked , and it is spit into the eyes of draught animals .
This must suffice for my account of salt .
SOL I must not put off describing the character of soda , which is very similar to salt ; a more careful account must be given because it is plain that the physicians who have written about it were ignorant of its character , and that nobody has given a more careful description than Theophrastus .
A little is formed in Media in valleys that are white through drought ; they call it halmyrax .
It is also found in Thrace near Philippi , but in less quantities and contaminated with earth ; it is called agrium .
But soda from burnt oak-wood was never made in large quantities , and the method has long been altogether abandoned .
Alkaline water , however , is found in very many places , but the soda is not concentrated enough to solidify .
At Clitae in Macedonia is found in abundance the best , called soda of Chalestra , white and pure , very like salt .
There is an alkaline lake there with a little spring of fresh water rising up in the centre .
Soda forms in it about the rising of the Dog-star for nine days , ceases for nine days , comes to the top again and then ceases .
This shows that it is the character of the soil that produces soda , since it has been discovered that , when it ceases , neither sunshine is of any help at all nor yet rain .
Another wonderful thing about the lake is that although the spring is always bubbling up it neither gets larger nor overflows .
But if , on those days on which soda forms , has been rain , it makes the soda more salty , while north winds on those days , by stirring up the mud too vigorously , makes it inferior .
This soda is natural , but in Egypt it is made artificially , in much greater abundance but of inferior quality , for it is dark and stony .
It is made in almost the same manner as is salt , except that they pour seawater into the salt-beds but the Nile into the soda-beds .
The latter as the Nile rises become dry ; as it falls they are moist with liquid soda for forty days on end , and not as in Macedonia during fixed periods .
If rain also has fallen , they add less river water , and gather at once the soda that has begun to solidify , lest it should melt back into the soda-bed .
Thus too oily matter forms among the soda , useful for itch-scab on animals .
Soda however , stored in heaps , lasts a long time .
A wonder of Lake Ascanius and of certain springs around Chalcis is that the surface water is sweet and drinkable but underneath is alkaline .
Of soda the best is the finest , and therefore froth of soda is superior , but for some purposes the impure is good , for example colouring purple cloths and all kinds of dyeing .
Soda is of great use in the making of glass , as will be described in its proper place .
The soda-beds of Egypt used to be confined to the regions around Naucratis and Memphis , the beds around Memphis being inferior .
For the soda becomes stone-like in heaps there , and many of the soda piles there are for the same reason quite rocky .
From these they make vessels , and frequently by baking melted soda with sulphur .
For the bodies too that they wish to embalm this is the soda they use .
In this region are soda-beds from which red soda also is taken owing to the colour of the earth .
Foam of soda , which is very highly prized , the ancients said was formed only when dew had fallen on beds teeming with soda but not yet bringing it forth ; accordingly , even if dew fell , soda did not form on beds in agitated action .
Others have thought that foam is produced by fermentation of the heaps .
The last generation of physicians said that in Asia was gathered aphronitrum oozing in soft caves — they are called colligae — and then dried in the sun .
The best is thought to be Lydian .
The tests are that it should be the least heavy and the most friable , and of an almost purple colour .
The last kind is imported in lozenges , but the Egyptian in vessels lined with pitch , lest it melt .
These vessels too are finished off by being dried in the sun .
The tests of soda are that it should be very fine and as spongy and full of holes as possible .
In Egypt it is adulterated with lime , which is detected by the taste ; for pure soda melts at once , but adulterated soda stings because of the lime , and gives out a strong odour .
It is burnt in an earthen jar with a lid , lest it should crackle out ; otherwise soda does not crackle in fire ; it produces nothing and nourishes nothing , whereas in salt-pits grow plants , and in the sea so many animals and so much seaweed .
But that the pungency of soda is greater is shown not only by this evidence but also by the fact that soda-beds at once consume shoes , but are otherwise healthful and good for clearness of vision .
In the soda-beds nobody has ophthalmia ; sores brought there heal very quickly , but those that form there heal slowly .
Soda and oil also make to sweat those who are rubbed with the mixture , which softens the flesh .
They use Chalestran soda for bread instead of salt , Egyptian soda for radishes ; it makes them more tender , but meats white and inferior and vegetables greener .
In medicine soda warms , alleviates , stings , braces , dries , and clears away ulcers , and is useful for conditions where there must be withdrawal , dispersal , and gentle stinging and alleviation , as with pimples and blisters .
Some for this purpose set it on fire and put it out with a dry wine , and use it so prepared and ground in the bath without oil .
Excessive sweats are checked by soda with dried iris and the addition of green oil ; it also improves scars on the eyes and roughness of the lids if applied with fig , or boiled down to one half in raisin wine , a preparation too which is used for white ulcers and inflamed swellings on the eyes .
Boiled down with raisin wine in a pomegranate rind , and applied with honey , it improves vision .
Soda is good for toothache if a mouthwash is made by adding pepper and wine .
Boiled down too with leek , and burnt to make a dentifrice , it restores the colour of blackening teeth .
Insects and nits on the head it kills if applied in oil with Samian earth .
Dissolved in wine it is poured into purulent ears ; wax in the same organ it eats away in vinegar ; noises and singing it stops if added dry .
Applied in sunshine with vinegar and an equal weight of Cimolian chalk it cures the white kinds of psoriasis .
It brings to a head boils , either mixed with resin or with white raisins , the pips being ground up with them .
With axle-grease it combats inflammation of the testicles , and also outbursts of phlegm on the whole body ; it is applied with vinegar , resin being added , to dog-bites .
This preparation is used for snake bites ; for phagedaenic , creeping , or festering ulcers , with lime and vinegar ; for dropsy it is pounded with figs and administered by the mouth and externally .
Griping pains too it allays if there is taken a drachma by weight boiled down with rue or dill or cummin .
The pains of fatigue are removed by rubbing all over with soda , oil , and vinegar , while for chills and shivers it is of advantage to rub the hands and feet thoroughly with soda and oil .
It also checks the itch of jaundice , especially when administered with vinegar while the patient is sweating .
Taken in vinegar and water soda is beneficial against the poisons of fungi ; if a buprestris has been swallowed it is taken in water ; it is also a good emetic .
It is given in laser to those who have drunk bull 's blood .
Ulcerations also on the face it heals with honey and cow 's milk .
It is applied to burns roasted until it turns black and crushed to powder .
It is injected for pain in the and kidneys , or for rigors of the body , or for pains of the sinews .
For paralysis of the tongue it is applied there with bread , and for asthma it is taken in barley gruel .
Chronic cough is cured by flower of soda with galbanum mixed with terebrinth resin , all equal in weight , but the piece to be swallowed must be of the size of a bean .
Soda , boiled and then combined with liquid pitch , is given to be swallowed by patients with quinsy .
Flower of soda with oil of cyprus is also soothing if applied in the sun for pains in the joints .
Jaundice also it alleviates taken in a draught of wine ; this remedy relieves flatulence .
It checks epistaxis if inhaled in the steam from boiling water .
By soda mixed with alum is removed scurf , rank smell of the armpits by daily fomentation with soda and water , sores due to nose-running by soda mixed with wax — a mixture also good for the sinews — and it is injected for the coeliac affection .
Many have prescribed complete rubbing with soda and oil before the chills of fever come on , and so to use it for leprons sores and freckles ; and they prescribe its use in the bath for gouty people .
Soda baths are good for consnmptives , and for the victims of opisthotonus and other forms of tetanus .
Salt and soda , when heated with sulphur , turn to stone .
SOL Of the kinds of sponges I have spoken when describing the nature of marine creatures .
Certain authorities classify them thus : some sponges , the males , have little holes , and are more compact and very absorbent ; they are also dyed for the luxurious , sometimes even with purple ; others , the females , have larger and uninterrupted holes ; others , harder than the males , called tragi , have very small holes that are very close together .
Sponges are whitened artificially .
Fresh sponges , of the softest kind , are soaked in foam of salt throughout the summer , and then laid open to the moon and hoar-frosts upside down , that is , with the side uppermost that adhered to the rocks , so that they may drink in whiteness .
I have said that sponges are animal , being even lined with a coating of blood .
Some also declare that they are guided by a sense of hearing , and contract at a noise , sending out a great quantity of moisture ; that they cannot be torn from the rocks , and therefore are cut off , bleeding sanies .
Moreover , those growing exposed to the north-east they prefer to others , and physicians declare that nowhere else does their breath last for a longer time .
Such too , they say , are beneficial to the human body , because they mix their breath with ours ; therefore fresh sponges are the more beneficial , as are also the moist , but less beneficial are those soaked in hot water , or those that are oily , or laid on oily bodies , while compact sponges are less adhesive .
The softest kind of sponge is that used for bandage-rolls .
Applied in honey wine these relieve swollen eyes .
They are also good for wiping away the rheum of ophthalmia , which they do most efficiently with water .
They should be very fine and very soft .
Sponges themselves are applied in vinegar and water for eye-fluxes , and in warm vinegar for headaches .
For the rest , fresh sponges are dispersive , soothing , and emollient ; old sponges do not close wounds .
The uses of sponges are to be detergent , to foment , and after fomentation to cover until something else is applied .
Applied also to wet ulcers of senile persons , sponges dry them , and they foment with the greatest benefit fractures and wounds .
In surgery sponges quickly absorb the blood , so that treatment can easily be observed .
Sponges themselves are applied to inflamed wounds , sometimes dry , at other times moistened with vinegar , or wine , or cold water ; applied indeed in rainwater to fresh incisions they prevent their swelling .
They are also laid on parts that are whole , but suffering from a hidden flux that has to be dispersed , and also on what are called apostemata , after rubbing them with boiled honey ; on joints also , sometimes moistened with salted vinegar , sometimes with vinegar and water ; should the complaint be attended with fever , water alone is to be used .
With salt and water sponges are also applied to callosities , but with vinegar to scorpion stings .
In the treatment of wounds sponges with salt and water also act as a substitute for greasy wool ; the difference is that wools soften , but sponges are astringent and absorb quickly the diseased humours of ulcers .
They are also bound round dropsical parts , either dry or with warm water or vinegar and water , whenever there is need to soothe , or cover a the skin , or dry it .
They are applied also for such diseases as need a steamy heat , steeped in boiling water , and pressed between two boards .
So applied they are also good for the stomach , and for the excessive burnings of fever ; but for the spleen with vinegar and water , while for erysipelas they are with vinegar more efficacious than anything ; they should be so placed that there is ample covering for the healthy parts .
With vinegar or cold water they arrest haemorrhage , with hot salt and water , often changed , they remove fresh bruises caused by a blow , and with vinegar and water they cure swollen and painful testicles .
For dog-bite are applied beneficially with vinegar , cold water , or honey , cut-off pieces of sponge , which must be thoroughly moistened every now and then .
The ash of the African sponge , swallowed with the juice of cut-leek , is good for spitting of blood ; for other complaints it should be taken in cold water .
This ash also , applied to the forehead with oil or vinegar , cures tertian agues .
African sponges are specific with vinegar and water for reducing swellings , and the ash of all sponges burnt with pitch arrest haemorrhage from wounds ; for this purpose some burn with pitch only sponges of loose texture .
For eye remedies sponges are burnt in an unbaked earthenware pot , this ash being very efficacious indeed for roughness or excrescences of the eyelids , and for any complaint in the region of the eyes that needs a remedy detergent , astringent , or expletive , but for this treatment it is better to rinse the ash .
They also furnish a substitute for scrapers and towels when the body is diseased .
Sponges protect also efficiently the head against the sun .
In their ignorance physicians have reduced sponges to two classes : the African , which are firmer and harder , and the Ithodian , which are softer for fomentations .
Today however a very soft sponges are found around the walls of Antiphellus .
Trogus informs us that around Lycia very soft tent-sponges grow out at sea , in places where sponges have been taken away ; Polybius that hung over a sick man these give more peaceful nights .
Now I shall turn my attention to the creatures of the sea .
SOL
