SUCH are the generic and specific characteristics of all the animals about which it has been possible to obtain information .
It remains to describe the things produced by the earth or dug up from it — these also not being devoid of vital spirit , since nothing lives without it — and not to pass over in silence any of the works of nature .
SOL The riches of earth 's bounty were for a long time hidden , and the trees and forests were supposed to be the supreme gift bestowed by her on man .
These first provided him with food , their foliage carpeted his cave and their bark served him for raiment ; there are still races which practise this mode of life .
This inspires us with ever greater and greater wonder that starting from these beginnings man has come to quarry the mountains for marbles , to go as far as China for raiment , and to explore the depths of the Red Sea for the pearl and the bowels of the earth for the emerald .
For this purpose has been devised the fashion of making wounds in the ears , because forsooth it was not enough for jewels to be worn on the hands and neck and hair without making them even pierce through the body .
Consequently it will be well to follow the biological order and to speak of trees before earth 's other products , and to bring forward origins for our customs .
SOL Once upon a time trees were the temples of the deities , and in conformity with primitive ritual simple country places even now dedicate a tree of exceptional height to a god ; nor do we pay greater worship to images shining with gold and ivory than to the forests and to the very silences that they contain .
The different kinds of trees are kept perpetually dedicated to their own divinities , for instance , the winter-oak to Jove , the bay to Apollo , the olive to Minerva , the myrtle to Venus , the poplar to Hercules ; nay , more , we also believe that the Silvani and Fauns and various kinds of goddesses are as it were assigned to the forests from heaven and as their own special divinities .
Subsequently it was the trees with juices more succulent than corn that gave mellowness to man ; for from frees are obtained olive oil to refresh the limbs and draughts of wine to restore the strength , and in fine all the savours that come by the spontaneous generosity of the year , and the fruits that are even now served as a second course , in spite of the fact that battle must be waged with the wild beasts to obtain them and that fishes fattened on the corpses of shipwrecked mariners are in demand .
Moreover , there are a thousand other uses for those trees which are indispensable for carrying on life .
We use a tree to furrow the seas and to bring the lands nearer together , we use a tree for building houses ; even the images of the deities were made from trees , before men had yet thought of paying a price for the corpses of huge animals , or arranged that inasmuch as the privilege of luxury had originated from the gods , we should behold the countenances of the deities and the legs of our tables made of the same ivory .
It is stated that the Gauls , imprisoned as they were by the Alps as by a then insuperable bulwark , first found a motive for overflowing into Italy from the circumstance that a Gallic citizen from Switzerland named Helico , who had sojourned at Rome on account of his skill as an artificer , had brought with him when he came back some dried figs and grapes and some samples of oil and wine ; and consequently we may pardon them for having sought to obtain these things even by means of war .
SOL But who would not be justifiably surprised to hear that a tree has been procured from another clime merely for the sake of shade ?
This tree is the plane , which was first imported into the Ionian Sea as far as the island of San Domenico to plant over the tomb of Diomede , and which crossed from there to Sicily and was one of the first trees bestowed on Italy , and which has now travelled as far as Belgium and actually occupies soil that pays tribute to Rome , so that the tribes have to pay rent even for shade .
The elder Dionysius , the tyrant of Sicily , imported plane-trees to the city of Rcggio as a marvel to adorn his palace , on the site where afterwards a gymnasium was built ; and it is found in the authorities that these trees were not able to grow to full size , and that in all Italy there were no others except the ' Spania .
' SOL This took place at about the period of the capture of Rome ; and so much honour has since accrued to plane-trees that their growth is encouraged by having wine poured on them , as it has been found that this is of the greatest benefit to the roots , and we have taught even trees to be wine-bibbers !
SOL Famous plane-frees are : ( 1 ) one that grew in the walks of the Academy at Athens , the roots of which were 50 feet long and spread wider than the branches ; ( 2 ) at the present day there is a celebrated plane in Lycia , allied with the amenity of a cool spring ; it stands by the roadside like a dwelling-house with a hollow cavity inside it 81 feet across , forming with its summit a shady grove , and shielding itself with vast branches as big as trees and covering the fields with its long shadows , and so as to complete its resemblance to a grotto , embracing inside it mossy pumice-stones in a circular rim of rock — a tree so worthy to be deemed a marvel that Licinius Mucianus , who was three times consul and recently lieutenant-governor of the province , thought it worth handing down to posterity also that he had held a banquet with eighteen members of his retinue inside the tree , which itself provided couches of leafage on a bounteous scale , and that he had then gone to bed in the same tree , shielded from every breath of wind , and receiving more delight from the agreeable sound of the rain dropping through the foliage than gleaming marble , painted decorations or gilded panelling could have afforded .
( 3 ) Another instance is connected with the Emperor Caligula , who on an estate at Velletri was impressed by the flooring of a single plane-tree , and benches laid loosely on beams consisting of its branches , and held a banquet in the tree — himself constituting a considerable portion of the shadow than a dining-room large enough to hold fifteen guests and the servants : this dining-room the emperor called his ' nest .
' ( 4 ) There is a single plane-free at the side of a spring at Gortyn in the island of Crete which is celebrated in records written both in Greek and Latin , as never shedding its leaves ; and a typical Greek story about it has come down from early times , to the effect that underneath it Jupiter lay with Europa — just as if really there were not another tree of the same species in the island of Cyprus !
Slips from this tree , however , planted first in Crete itself — so eager is human nature for a novelty — reproduced the defect : for defect it was , because the plane has no greater recommendation than its property of warding off the sun in summer and admitting it in winter .
During the principate of Claudius an extremely wealthy Thessalian eunuch , who was a freedman of Marcellus Aeserninus but had for the sake of obtaining power got himself enrolled among the freedmen of the emperor , imported this variety of plane-tree from Crete into Italy and introduced it at his country estate near Rome — so that he deserves to be called another Dionysius !
And these monstrosities from abroad still last on in Italy also , in addition , that is , to those which Italy has devised for herself .
SOL For there is also the variety called the ground-plane , stunted in height — since we have discovered the art of producing abortions even in trees , and consequently even in the tree class we shall have to speak of the unhappy subject of dwarfs .
The ground-plane is produced by a method of planting and of lopping .
Clipped arbours were invented within the last 80 years by a member of the Equestrian order named Gaius Matius , a friend of his late Majesty Augustus .
SOL The cherry and the peach and all the trees with Greek or foreign names are also exotic ; but those among them which have been naturalized here will be specified among the fruit-trees .
For the present we will go through the real exotics , beginning with the one most valuable for health .
SOL The citron or Assyrian apple , called by others the Median apple , is an antidote against poisons .
It has the leaves of the strawberry-tree , but with prickles running among them .
For the rest , the actual fruit is not eaten , but it has an exceptionally strong scent , which belongs also to the leaves , and which penetrates garments stored with them and keeps off injurious insects .
The tree itself bears fruit at all seasons , some of the apples falling while others are ripening and others just forming .
Because of its great medicinal value various nations have tried to acclimatize it in their own countries , importing it in earthenware pots provided with breathing holes for the roots ( and similarly , as it will be convenient to record here so that each of my points may be mentioned only once , all plants that are to travel a specially long distance are planted as tightly as possible for transport ) ; but it has refused to grow except in Media and Persia .
It is this fruit the pips of which , as we have mentioned , the Parthian grandees have cooked with their viands for the sake of sweetening their breath .
And among the Medes no other tree is highly commended .
SOL We have already described the wool-bearing trees of the Chinese in making mention of that race , and we have spoken of the large size of the trees in India .
One of those peculiar to India , the ebony , is spoken of in glowing terms by Virgil , who states that it does not grow in any other country .
Herodotus , however , prefers it to be ascribed to Ethiopia , stating that the Ethiopians used to pay as tribute to the Kings of Persia every three years a hundred logs of ebony , together with gold and ivory .
Nor also should we omit the fact , since that author indicates it , that the Ethiopians used to pay twenty large elephant tusks on the same account .
So high was the esteem in which ivory was held in the 310th year of our city , the date at which that author composed his history at Thurii in Italy ; which makes all the more surprising the statement which we accept on his authority , that nobody of Asia or Greece had hitherto been seen who had ever seen the river Po .
The exploration of the geography of Ethiopia , which as we have said had lately been reported to the Emperor Nero , showed that over a space of 1,996 miles from Syene on the frontier of the empire to Meroe trees are rare , and there are none except of the palm species .
That is possibly the reason why ebony was the third most important item in the tribute paid .
SOL Ebony was exhibited at Rome by Pompey the Great on the occasion of his triumph over Mithridates .
According to Fabius ebony does not give out a flame , yet burns with an agreeable scent .
It is of two kinds : the better one , which grows as a tree , is rare — it is of a smooth substance and free from knots , and of a shiny black colour that is pleasing to the eye even in the natural state without the aid of art ; whereas the other grows as a shrub like the cytisus , and is spread over the whole of India .
SOL In India there is also a thorn the wood of which resembles ebony , but can be detected even by the flame of a lantern , as the light at once shines through people .
The tree is called the pala , and the fruit ariena .
It is most frequent in the territory of the Sydraci , which was the farthest point reached by the expeditions of Alexander .
There is also another tree resembling this one , the fruit of which is sweeter , but causes derangement of the bowels .
Alexander issued an order in advance forbidding any member of his expedition to touch it .
SOL The Macedonians have given accounts of kinds of trees that for the most part have no names .
There is also one that resembles the terebinth in every other respect but the fruit of which is like an almond , though smaller , and is remarkably sweet , at all events when grown in Bactria .
This tree has been considered by some persons to be a special kind of terebinth rather than another plant resembling it .
The tree from which they make linen for clothing resembles a mulberry by its leaves , but the calyx of the fruit is like that of a dog-rose .
It is grown in the plains , and no other plantations add more to the beauty of the landscape .
SOL The olive-tree of India is barren , except for the fruit of the wild olive .
But trees resembling our junipers that bear pepper occur everywhere , although some writers have reported that they only grow on the southern face of the Caucasus .
The seeds differ from those of the juniper by being in small pods , like those which we see in the case of the kidney-bean ; these pods when plucked before they open and dried in the sun produce what is called long pepper , but if left to open gradually , when ripe they disclose white pepper , which if afterwards dried in the sun changes colour and wrinkles up .
Even these products , however , have their own special infirmity , and inclement weather shrivels them up and turns the seeds into barren husks , called bregma , which is an Indian word meaning ' dead .
' Of all kinds of pepper this is the most pungent and the lightest , and it is pale in colour .
Black pepper is more agreeable , but white pepper is of a milder flavour than either the black or the ' long ' pepper .
SOL The root of the pepper-tree is not , as some people have thought , the same as the substance called ginger , or by others zinpiberi , although it has a similar flavour .
Ginger is grown on farms in Arabia and Cave-dweller Country it is a small plant with a white root .
The plant is liable to decay very quickly , in spite of its extreme pungency .
Its price is six denarii a pound .
It is easy to adulterate long pepper with Alexandrian mustard .
Long pepper is sold at 15 denarii a pound , white pepper at 7 , and black at 4 .
It is remarkable that the use of pepper has come so much into favour , as in the case of some commodities their sweet taste has been an attraction , and in Others their appearance , but pepper has nothing to recommend it in either fruit or berry .
To think that its only pleasing quality is pungency and that we go all the way to India to get this !
Who was the first person who was willing to try it on his viands , or in his greed for an appetite was not content merely to be hungry ?
Both pepper and ginger grow wild in their own countries , and nevertheless they are bought by weight like gold or silver .
Italy also now possesses a pepper-tree that grows larger than a myrtle , which it somewhat resembles .
Its grains have the same pungency as that believed to belong to myrtle-pepper , but when dried it lacks the ripeness that the other has , and consequently has not the same wrinkles and colouring either .
Pepper is adulterated with juniper berries , which absorb its pungency in a remarkable manner , and in the matter of weight there are several ways of adulterating it .
SOL There is also in India a grain resembling that of pepper , but larger and more brittle , called the carvophyllon , which is reported to grow on the Indian lotus-tree ; it is imported here for the sake of its scent .
There is also a thorn-bush bearing an extremely bitter fruit that has a resemblance to pepper ; this shrub has small thickly clustering leaves like the cyprus ; the branches are 4 1 / 2 feet long , the bark of a pale colour , and the root wide-spreading and woody , of the colour of box .
This root boiled in water with the seed in a copper vessel produces the medicine called lycion .
The thorn in question also grows on Mount Pelion , where it is used for mixing with a drug , as also are the root of the asphodel , ox-gall , wormwood , sumach and the lees of olive oil .
The best lycion for medicinal purposes is the kind that makes a froth ; this is imported from India in leather bottles made of camel skin or rhinoceros hide .
The shrub itself is sometimes known in Greece under the name of Chiron 's buckthorn .
SOL Another substance imported from India is macir , the red bark of the large root of a tree of the same name , which I have been unable to identify .
This bark boiled with honey is considered in medicine to be a valuable specific for dysentery .
SOL Arabia also produces cane-sugar , but that grown in India is more esteemed .
It is a kind of honey that collects in reeds , white like gum , and brittle to the teeth ; the largest pieces are the size of a filbert .
It is only employed as a medicine .
SOL On the frontier of India is a race called the Arian , which has a thorn-bush that is valuable for the juice that it distils , resembling myrrh .
It is difficult to get at this bush because it is hedged with thorns .
In the same district there is also a poisonous bush-radish , with the leaf of a bay-tree , the smell of which attracts horses , and nearly robbed Alexander of his cavalry when he first entered the region .
This also happened in Gedrosia as well , on account of the foliage of the bay-trees ; and in the same district a thorn was reported the juice of which sprinkled on the eyes caused blindness in all animals .
There was also a plant with a very strong scent , that was full of tiny snakes whose bite was instantly fatal .
Onesicritus reports that in the valleys of Hyrcania there are trees resembling the fig , named occhus-trees , which for two hours every morning drip honey .
SOL Adjoining India is the Bactrian country , in which is produced the highly esteemed bdellium .
The tree is black in colour , and the size of the olive ; its leaf resembles that of the oak and its fruit that of the wild fig. The subsistence of the fruit is like gum ; one name for it is brochos , another malacha , and another maldaeos , while a black variety which is rolled up into cakes has the name of hadrobolos .
It ought to be transparent like wax , to have a scent , to exude grease when crumbled , and to have a bitter taste , though without acidity .
When used in religions ritual it is steeped in wine , which makes its scent more powerful .
This tree is native to Arabia and India , and also to Media and Babylon .
Some people give to the bdellium imported from Media the name of peraticum ; this kind is more brittle and also harder and more bitter than the others , whereas the Indian sort is moister , and gummy .
Almonds are used to adulterate Indian bdellium , but all the other sorts are adulterated also with the bark of scordastum , that being the name of a tree that resembles the gum .
But these adulterations can be detected — and it must be enough to state this once for all , to apply to all other perfumes as well — by smell , colour , weight , taste and the action of fire .
The Bactrian bdellium is shiny and dry , and has a number of white spots like fingernails ; and also it has a specific weight of its own and ought not to be heavier or lighter than this .
The price of pure bdellium is 3 denarii a pound .
SOL Adjoining the races above mentioned is Persia .
On the Red Sea , which at this point we have called the Persian Gulf , the tides of which are carried a long way inland , the trees are of a remarkable nature ; for they are to be seen on the coast when the tide is out , embracing the barren sands with their naked roots like polypuses , eaten away by the salt and looking like trunks that have been washed ashore and left high and dry .
Also these trees when the tide rises remain motionless although beaten by the waves ; indeed at high water they are completely covered , and the evidence of the facts clearly proves that this species of tree is nourished by the brackish water .
They are of marvellous size , and in appearance they resemble the strawberry-tree , but their fruit is like almonds outside and contains a spiral kernel .
SOL In the same gulf is the island of Tyros , which is covered with forests in the part facing east , where it also is flooded by the sea at high tide .
Each of the trees is the size of a fig-tree ; they have a flower with an indescribably sweet scent and the fruit resembles a lupine , and is so prickly that no animal can touch it .
On a more elevated plateau in the same island there are trees that bear wool , but in a different manner to those of the Chinese as the leaves of these trees have no growth on them , and might be thought to be vine-leaves were it not that they are smaller ; but they bear gourds of the size of a quince , which when they ripen burst open and disclose balls of down from which an expensive linen for clothing is made .
SOL Their name for this tree is the gossypinus ; it also grows in greater abundance on the smaller island of Tyros , which is ten miles distant from the other .
Juba says that this shrub has a woolly down poring round it , the fabric made from which is superior to the linen of India .
He also says that there is an Arabian tree called the cynas from which cloth is made , which has foliage resembling a palm-leaf .
Similarly the natives of India are provided with clothes by their own trees .
But in the Tyros islands there is also another tree with a blossom like a white violet but four times as large ; it has no scent , which may well surprise us in that region of the world .
SOL There is also another tree which resembles this one but has more foliage and a rose-coloured blossom , which it closes at nightfall and begins to open at sunrise , unfolding it fully at noon : the natives speak of it as going to sleep .
The same island also produces palm-trees and vines , as well as figs and all the other kinds of fruit-trees .
nan of the trees there sheds its leaves ; and the island is watered by cold springs , and has a considerable rainfall .
SOL The country neighbouring on these islands , Arabia , calls for some detailed account of its products — inasmuch as the parts of trees that are utilized include the root , the trunk , the bark , the juice , the gum , the wood , the shoots , the blossom , the leaves and the fruit .
SOL In India a root and a leaf are held in the highest value .
The root is that of the costus , which has a burning taste and an exquisite scent , though in other respects the plant is of no use .
In the island of Patale just in the mouth of the river Indus , there are two kinds of costus plant , the black and the white ; the latter is the better ; it sells at denarii a pound .
SOL About the leaf , which is that of the nard , it is proper to speak at greater length , as it holds a foremost place among perfumes .
The nard is a shrub , the root of which is heavy and thick but short and black , and although oily , brittle ; it has a musty smell like the gladius , and an acrid taste ; the leaves are small , and grow in clusters .
The shoots of the nard sprout into ears , and consequently both the spikes and the leaves of the nard are famous — a two-fold product .
Another kind of nard growing by the Ganges is entirely ruled out by its name , ' putrid nard ,' having a poisonous smell .
Nard is also adulterated with a plant called bastard nard , which grows everywhere , and has a thicker and broader leaf and a sickly colour inclining to white ; and also by being mixed with its own root to increase the weight , and with gum and silver-spume or antimony and gladiolus or husk of gladiolus .
Unadulterated nard can be detected by its light weight and its ruddy colour and sweet scent and particularly by its taste , which dries up the mouth and leaves a pleasant flavour .
SOL The price of nard is 100 denarii a pound .
The nard-leaf market is graded according to the size of the leaf : the kind called hadrosphaerum in larger pills costs 40 denarii ; the smaller-leaved sort called mesosphaerum sells at 60 denarii ; and the most highly spoken of , microsphaerum , is made of the smallest leaves and its price is 75 denarii .
All the kinds have an agreeable scent , stronger when they are fresh .
The better nard has a blacker colour , if it is old when gathered .
In our part of the world the next most highly praised kind is the Syrian , then that from Gaul , and in the third place is the Cretan , which some call agrion and others phun ; it has a leaf like that of alexanders , a stalk 18 inches long , knotted and coloured whitish purple , and a crooked hairy root resembling birds' claws .
Wild nard is called valerian ; we shall speak about it among flowers .
All of these kinds of nard , however , are herbs except the Indian .
Among them the Gallic kind is plucked with the root as well , and washed in wine , dried in a shady place , and done up with paper in small parcels ; it does not differ much from the Indian nard , but it is lighter in weight than the Syrian .
Its price is 3 denarii .
In the case of these varieties the only way to test them is that the leaves must not be brittle and parched instead of merely dry .
With Gallic nard there always grows the herb called little goat because of its offensive smell , like the smell of a goat ; it is very much employed to adulterate nard , from which it is distinguished by having no stem and smaller leaves , and by its root , which is not bitter and also has no smell .
SOL Hazelwort also has the property of nard , indeed some people actually call it ' wild nard .
' It has the leaves of the ivy , only rounder and softer , a purple flower , the root of Gallic nard , and seed like grape-stones , which has a warm taste with a flavour of wine .
On shady mountains it flowers twice a year .
The best variety grows in Pontus , the next best in Phrygia and the third in Illyricum .
When it begins to shed its leaves it is dug up and dried in the sun , as it quickly becomes mouldy and loses its strength .
A plant has also lately been found in Thrace the leaves of which do not differ at all from the Indian nard .
SOL The clustered arnomum is much in use ; it is obtained from the Indian wild-vine , or as other people have supposed from a twisted shrub a hand high , and it is plucked with its root and then gently pressed together into bundles , as it is liable to break at once .
The kind most highly spoken of is the one with leaves like those of the pomegranate and devoid of wrinkles , coloured red .
The second best kind is of a pale colour ; the grass-coloured one is not so good , and the white kind is the worst ; it also goes white with age .
The price of clustered amomum is 60 denarii a pound , but as dust it fetches only 48 denarii .
It grows in the part of Armenia called Otene , and also in Media and in Pontus .
It is adulterated with the leaves of the pomegranate and with liquid gum to make the leaves stick together and form a cluster like a bunch of grapes .
SOL There is also another substance called amomis , which is not so full of veins and is harder and has less scent , showing that it is either a different plant or amomum that has been gathered unripe .
SOL Resembling these substances both in name and in the shrub that produces it is cardamomum , the seeds of which are oblong in shape .
It is gathered in Arabia , in the same manner as amomum .
It has four varieties : one very green and oily , with sharp corners and awkward to crumble — this is the kind most highly spoken of — the next sort a whitish red , the third shorter and of a colour nearer black , while an inferior kind is mottled and easily friable , and has little scent — in the true kind the scent ought to be near to that of costus .
Cardamomum also grows in the country of the Medes .
The price of the best sort is 3 denarii a pound .
SOL Next in affinity to cardamomum would have come cinnamomum , were it not convenient first to catalogue the riches of Arabia and the reasons that have given it the names of Happy and Blessed .
The chief products of Arabia then are frankincense and myrrh ; the latter it shares also with the Cave-dweller Country , but no country beside Arabia produces frankincense , and not even the whole of Arabia .
About in the middle of that country are the Astramitae , a district of the Sabaei , the capital of their realm being Sabota , situated on a lofty mountain ; and eight days' journey from Sabota is a frankincense-producing district belonging to the Sabaei called Sariba — according to the Greeks the name means ' secret mystery .
' The region faces north-east , and is surrounded by impenetrable rocks , and on the right hand side bordered by a seacoast with inaccessible cliffs .
The soil is reported to be of a milky white colour with a tinge of red .
The forests measure 20 schoeni in length and half that distance in breadth — by the calculation of Eratosthenes a schoenus measures 40 furlongs , that is five miles , but some authorities have made the schoenus 32 furlongs .
There are hills rising to a great height , with natural forests on them running right down to the level ground .
It is generally agreed that the soil is clay , and that there are few springs and these charged with alkali .
Adjacent to the Astramitae is another district , the Minaei , through whose territory the transit for the export of the frankincense is along one narrow track .
It was these people who originated the trade and who chiefly practise it , and from them the perfume takes the name of Minaean ; none of the Arabs beside these have ever seen an incense-tree , and not even all of these , and it is said that there are not more than 3000 families who retain the right of trading in it as a hereditary property , and that consequently the members of these families are called sacred , and are not allowed to be polluted by ever meeting women or funeral processions when they are engaged in making incisions in the trees in order to obtain the frankincense , and that in this way the price of the commodity is increased owing to scruples of religion .
Some persons report that the frankincense in the forests belongs to all these peoples in common , but others state that it is shared out among them in yearly turns .
SOL Nor is there agreement in regard to the appearance of the incense-tree itself .
We have carried on operations in Arabia , and the arms of Rome have penetrated into a large part of it ; indeed , Gaius Caesar , son of Augustus , won great renown from the country ; yet no Latin writer , so far as I know , has described the appearance of this tree .
The descriptions given by the Greeks vary : some have stated that it has the leaf of a pear-tree , only smaller and of a grass-green colour ; others that it resembles the mastich and has a reddish leaf ; some that it is a kind of terebinth , and that this was the view of King Antigonus , to whom a plant was brought .
King Juba in his volumes dedicated to Gaius Caesar , son of Augustus , whose imagination was fired by the fame of Arabia , states that the tree has a twisted stem and branches closely resembling those of the Pontic maple and that it gives a juice like that of the almond ; he says that trees of this description are to be seen in Carmania and in Egypt , where they were introduced under the influence of the Ptolemies when they reigned there .
It is well known that it has the bark of a bay-tree , and some have said that the leaf is also like that of the bay ; at all events that was the case with the tree when it was grown at Sardis — for the Kings of Asia also interested themselves in planting it .
The ambassadors who have come to Rome from Arabia in my time have made all these matters still more uncertain , which may well surprise us , seeing that even some sprigs of the incense-tree find their way to Rome , on the evidence of which we may believe that the parent tree also is smooth and tapering and that it puts out its shoots from a trunk that is free from knots .
SOL It used to be the custom , when there were fewer opportunities of selling frankincense , to gather it only once a year , but at the present day trade introduces a second harvesting .
The earlier and natural gathering takes place at about the rising of the Dog-star , when the summer heat is most intense .
They make an incision where the bark appears to be fullest of juice and distended to its thinnest ; and the bark is loosened with a blow , but not removed .
From the incision a greasy foam spurts out , which coagulates and thickens , being received on a mat of palm-leaves where the nature of the ground requires this , but in other places on a space round the tree that has been rammed hard .
The frankincense collected in the latter way is in a purer state , but the former method produces a heavier weight ; while the residue adhering to the tree is scraped off with an iron tool , and consequently contains fragments of bark .
The forest is divided up into definite portions , and owing to the mutual honesty of the owners is free from trespassing , and though nobody keeps guard over the trees after an incision has been made , nobody steals from his neighbour .
At Alexandria , on the other hand , where the frankincense is worked up for sale , good heavens !
no vigilance is sufficient to guard the factories .
A seal is put upon the workmen 's aprons , they have to wear a mask or a net with a close mesh on their heads , and before they are allowed to leave the premises they have to take off all their clothes : so much less honesty is displayed with regard to the produce with them than as to the forests with the growers .
The frankincense from the summer crop is collected in autumn ; this is the purest kind , bright white in colour .
The second crop is harvested in the spring , cuts having been made in the bark during the winter in preparation for it ; the juice that comes out on this occasion is reddish , and not to be compared with the former taking , the name for which is carflathum , the other being called dathiathum .
Also the juice produced by a sapling is believed to be whiter , but that from an older tree has more scent .
Some people also think that a better kind is produced on islands , but Juba says that no incense grows on islands at all .
SOL Frankincense that hangs suspended in a globular drop we call male frankincense , although in other connexions the term ' male ' is not usually employed where there is no female ; but it is said to have been due to religious scruple that the name of the other sex was not employed in this case .
Some people think that male frankincense is so called from its resemblance to the testes .
The frankincense most esteemed , however , is the breast-shaped , formed when , while a previous drop is still hanging suspended , another one following unites with it .
I find it recorded that one of these lumps used to be a whole handful , in the days when men 's eagerness to pluck them was less greedy and they were allowed to form more slowly .
The Greek name for frankincense formed in this manner is ' drop-incense ' or ' solid incense ,' and for the smaller kind ' chick-pea incense ' ; the fragments knocked off by striking the tree we call manna .
Even at the present day , however , drops are found that weigh as much as a third of a mina , that is 28 denarii .
Alexander the Great in his boyhood was heaping frankincense on the altars in lavish fashion , when his tutor Leonides told him that he might worship the gods in that manner when he had conquered the frankincense-producing races ; but when Alexander had won Arabia he sent Leonides a ship with a cargo of frankincense , with a message charging him to worship the gods without any stint .
SOL Frankincense after being collected is conveyed to Sabota on camels , one of the gates of the city being opened for its admission ; the kings have made it a capital offence for camels so laden to turn aside from the high road .
At Sahota a tithe estimated by measure and not by weight is taken by the priests for the god they call Sabis , and the incense is not allowed to be put on the market until this has been done ; this tithe is drawn on to defray what is a public expenditure , for actually on a fixed number of days the god graciously entertains guests at a banquet .
It can only be exported through the country of the Gebbanitae , and accordingly a tax is paid on it to the king of that people as well .
Their capital is Thomna , which is 1487 1 / 2 miles distant from the town of Gaza in Judea on the Mediterranean coast ; the journey is divided into 65 stages with halts for camels .
Fixed portions of the frankincense are also given to the priests and the king 's secretaries , but beside these the guards and their attendants and the gate-keepers and servants also have their pickings : indeed all along the route they keep on paying , at one place for water , at another for fodder , or the charges for lodging at the halts , and the various octrois ; so that expenses mount up to 688 denarii per camel before the Mediterranean coast is reached ; and then again payment is made to the customs officers of our empire .
Consequently the price of the best frankincense is 6 , of the second best 5 , and the third best 3 denarii a pound .
It is tested by its whiteness and stickiness , its fragility and its readiness to catch fire from a hot coal ; and also it should not give to pressure of the teeth , and should rather crumble into grains .
Among us it is adulterated with drops of white resin , which closely resemble it , but the fraud can be detected by the means specified .
SOL Some authorities have stated that myrrh is the product of a tree growing in the same forests among the frankincense-trees , but the majority say that it grows separately ; and in fact it occurs in many places in Arabia , as will appear when we deal with its varieties .
A kind highly spoken of is also imported from islands , and the Sabaei even cross the sea to the Cave-dwellers' Country to procure it .
Also a cultivated variety is produced which is much preferred to the wild kind .
The plant enjoys being raked and having the soil round it loosened , as it is the better for having its roots cool .
SOL The tree grows to a height of nearly eight feet ; it has thorns on it , and the trunk is hard and twisted , and thicker than that of the frankincense-tree , and even thicker at the root than in the remaining part of it .
Authorities state that the bark is smooth and resembles that of the strawberry-tree , and others that it is rough and prickly ; and they say that the leaf is that of the olive , but more wrinkled and with sharp points — though Juba says it is like that of the alexanders .
Some say that it resembles the juniper , only that it is rougher and bristling with thorns , and that the leaf is rounder but tastes like juniper .
Also there have been writers who have falsely asserted that the frankincense-tree produces myrrh as well as frankincense .
SOL The myrrh-producing tree also is tapped twice a year at the same seasons as the frankincense-tree , but in its case the incisions are made all the way up from the root to those of the branches that are strong enough to bear it .
But before it is tapped the tree exudes of its own accord a juice called staete , which is the most highly valued of all myrrh .
Next after this comes the cultivated kind , and also the better variety of the wild kind , the one tapped in summer .
No tithes are given to a god from myrrh , as it also grows in other countries ; however , the growers have to pay a quarter of the yield to the king of the Gebbanitae .
For the rest it is bought up all over the district from the common people and packed into leather bags ; and our perfumiers have no difficulty in distinguishing the different sorts by the evidence of the scent and consistency .
There are a great many varieties , the first among the wild kinds being the Cave-dweller myrrh , next the Minaean , which includes the Astramitic , Gebbanitic and Ausaritic from the kingdom of the Gebbanitae ; the third quality is the Dianite , the fourth a mixture from various sources , the fifth the Sambracene from a seaboard state in the kingdom of the Sabaei , and the sixth the one called Dusirite .
There is also a white kind found in one place only , which is brought into the town of Mesalum for sale .
The Cave-dweller kind is distinguished by its thickness and because it is rather dry and dusty and foreign in appearance , but has a stronger scent than the other sorts .
The Sambracene variety is advertised as surpassing other kinds in its agreeable quality , but it has not a strong scent .
Broadly speaking , however , the proof of goodness is given by its being in small pieces of irregular shape , forming in the solidifying of the juice as it turns white and dries up , and in its showing white marks like fingernails when it is broken , and having a slightly bitter taste .
The second best kind is mottled inside , and the worst is the one that is black inside ; and if it is black outside as well it is of a still inferior quality .
SOL The prices vary with the supply of buyers ; that of staete ranges from 3 to 50 denarii a pound , whereas the top price for cultivated myrrh is 11 denarii and for Erythrean 16 — this kind is passed off as Arabian — and for the kernel of Cave-dweller 16 1 / 2 , but for the variety called scented myrrh 12 .
Myrrh is adulterated with lumps of lentisk and with gum , and also with cucumber juice to give it a bitter taste , as it is with litharge of silver to increase its weight .
The rest of the impurities can be detected by taste , and gum by its sticking to the teeth .
But the adulteration most difficult to detect is that practised in the case of Indian myrrh , which is collected in India from a certain thorn-bush ; this is the only commodity imported from India that is of worse quality than that of other countries — indeed it is easily distinguished because it is so very inferior .
SOL Consequently Indian myrrh passes over into mastich , which is also obtained from a thorn in India , and in Arabia as well ; it is called laina .
Of mastich also there are two kinds , since in Asia and Greece there is also found a plant sending out from its root leaves and a prickly head like an apple , full of seed and of juice which spurts out when an incision is made in the top , so that it can scarcely be distinguished from true mastich .
Moreover , there is also a third kind in Pontus which is more like bitumen ; but the kind most highly praised is the white mastich of Chios , which fetches a price of 10 denarii a pound , while the black kind costs 2 denarii .
It is said that the Chian mastich exudes from the lentisk like a kind of gum .
Like frankincense it is adulterated with resin .
SOL Arabia also still boasts of her ladanum .
A considerable number of writers have stated that this becomes aromatic entirely by accident and owing to an injury ; goats , they say , an animal very destructive of foliage in general , but especially fond of scented shrubs , as if understanding the prices they fetch crop the stalks of the shoots , which swell with an extremely sweet fluid , and wipe off with the nasty shaggy hair of their beards the juice dropping from the stalks in a random mixture , and this forms lumps in the dust and is baked by the sun ; and that is the reason why goats' hairs are found in ladanum ; though they say that this does not take place anywhere else but in the territory of the Nabataei , a people from Arabia who border on Syria .
The more recent of the authorities call this substance ' storbon ,' and say that the trees in the Arabs' forests are broken by the goats when browsing , and so the juice sticks to their hairs ; but that the true ladanum belongs to the island of Cyprus — to mention the various kinds of scents incidentally even though not in the order of their localities of provenance .
It is reported that the same thing takes place there too , and that there is a substance called oesypum which sticks to the beards and shaggy knees of the goats , but that it is produced by their nibbling down the flower of the ivy while they are browsing in the morning , when Cyprus is wet with dew ; and that subsequently when the sun has driven away the mist the dust clings to their damp fleeces and thus ladanum can be combed out of them .
SOL Some people call the plant in Cyprus from which ladanum is produced ' leda ,' as in fact these call the scent ' ledanum ' ; they say that its fat juices sweat out , and consequently the plant is rolled up in bundles by tying strings round it , and so made into cakes .
Therefore there are two varieties in each kind , the natural sort mingled with earth and the artificial ; the earthy sort is friable , whereas the artificial sort is tough .
SOL It is also stated that there is a ladanum shrub in Garmania and beyond Egypt , where plants of it were introduced through the agency of the Ptolemies , or , as others say , it is a throwback from the incense-tree ; and that it is collected like gum by making a cut in the bark and received in goatskin sacks .
The most highly approved kind is sold at a price of 40 asses a pound .
It is adulterated with myrtle berries and with filth from the fleeces of other animals beside the goat .
When genuine it ought to have a fierce scent , somehow suggesting the smell of the desert , and though looking dried up it should soften immediately to the touch , and when set light to flare up with an agreeable scent ; but when adulterated with myrtle-berries it can be detected by its unpleasant smell , and it crackles in the fire .
Moreover , the genuine ladanum has dust or rather bits of stone from the rocks clinging to it .
SOL In Arabia there is also an olive endowed with a sort of tear out of which a medicine is made , called in Greek enhaemon , because of its remarkable effect in closing the scars of wounds .
These trees grow on the coast and are covered by the waves at high tide without this doing any harm to the berry , although accounts agree that salt is left on the leaves .
SOL These trees are peculiar to Arabia , and it also has a few in common with other countries , which we must mention elsewhere because in their ease it does not hold the first place .
Also in Arabia there is a surprising demand for foreign scents , which are imported from abroad : so tired do mortals get of things that are their own , and so covetous are they of what belongs to other people .
SOL Consequently they send to the Elymaei for the wood of the bratum , a tree resembling a spreading cypress , with very white branches , and giving an agreeable scent when burnt .
It is praised in the Histories of Claudius Caesar as having a marvellous property : he states that the Parthians sprinkle its leaves into their drinks , and that it has a scent very like cedar , and its smoke is an antidote against the effects of other woods .
It grows beyond the River Karun on Mount Scanchrus in the territory of the city of Sostrata .
SOL They also import from Carmania the stobrus tree , to use for the purpose of fumigation ; it is soaked in palm wine and then set alight .
The vapour is thrown back from the ceiling to the floor ; it has an agreeable scent , but it causes headache , which is not however severe enough to be painful : it is used as a soporific for invalids .
For these trades they have opened up the city of Carrhae , which is the market town of these parts .
From Carrhae everybody used formerly to go on to Gabba , a journey of twenty days , and to Palestine in Syria ; but afterwards , according to Juba , they began to make for Charax and the Parthian kingdom for the sake of the perfume trade .
But my own view is that they used to convey those commodities to the Persians even before they took them to Syria or Egypt , this being attested by Herodotus , who records that the Arabs used regularly to pay a yearly tribute of a thousand talents of incense to the kings of the Persians .
From Syria they bring back styrax , which they burn on their hearths , for its powerful scent to dispel their dislike for their own scents .
For the rest , no other kinds of wood are in use among them except those that are scented ; and the Sabaei even cook their food with incense-wood , and other tribes with that of the myrrh-tree , so that the smoke and vapour of their towns and districts is just like that which rises from altars .
In order therefore to remedy this smell they obtain styrax in goatskins and fumigate their houses with it : so true it is that there is no pleasure the continued enjoyment of which does not engender disgust .
They also burn styrax to drive away the snakes which abound in the forests of perfume-producing trees .
SOL These people have not got cinnamon or casia , and nevertheless Arabia is styled ' Happy ' — a country with a false and ungrateful appellation , as she puts her happiness to the credit of the powers above , although she owes more of it to the power below .
Her good fortune has been caused by the luxury of mankind even in the hour of death , when they burn over the departed the products which they had originally understood to have been created for the gods .
Good authorities declare that Arabia does not produce so large a quantity of perfume in a year 's output as was burned by the Emperor Nero in a day at the obsequies of his consort Poppaea .
Then reckon up the vast number of funerals celebrated yearly throughout the entire world , and the perfumes such as are given to the gods a grain at a time , that are piled up in heaps to the honour of dead bodies .
Yet the gods used not to regard with less favour the worshippers who petitioned them with salted spelt , but rather , as the facts show , they were more benevolent in those days .
But the title ' happy ' belongs still more to the Arabian Sea , for from it come the pearls which that country sends us .
And by the lowest reckoning India , China and the Arabian peninsula take from our empire 100 million sesterces every year — that is the sum which our luxuries and our women cost us ; for what fraction of these imports , I ask you , now goes to the gods or to the powers of the lower world ?
SOL In regard to cinnamomum and casia a fabulous story has been related by antiquity , and first of all by Herodotus , that they are obtained from birds' nests , and particularly from that of the phoenix , in the region where Father Liber was brought up , and that they are knocked down from inaccessible rocks and trees by the weight of the flesh brought there by the birds themselves , or by means of arrows loaded with lead ; and similarly there is a tale of casia growing round marshes under the protection of a terrible kind of bats that guard it with their claws , and of winged serpents — these tales having been invented by the natives to raise the price of their commodities .
However , there goes with them a story that under the reflected rays of the sun at midday an indescribable sort of collective odour is given off from the whole of the peninsula , which is due to the harmoniously blended exhalation of so many kinds of vapour , and that the first news of Arabia received by the fleets of Alexander the Great was carried by these odours far out to sea — all these stories being false , inasmuch as cinnamomum , which is the same thing as cinnamon , grows in Ethiopia , which is linked by intermarriage with the Cave-dwellers .
The latter buy it from their neighbours and convey it over the wide seas in ships that are neither steered by rudders nor propelled by oars or drawn by sails , nor assisted by any device of art : in those regions only man and man 's boldness stands in place of all these things .
Moreover they choose the winter sea about the time of the shortest day , as an east wind is then chiefly blowing .
This carries them on a straight course through the bays , and after rounding a cape a west-north-west wind brings them to the harbour of the Gebbanitae called Ocilia .
On this account that is the port most resorted to by these people , and they say that it is almost five years before the traders return home and that many perish on the voyage .
In return for their wares they bring back articles of glass and copper , clothing , and buckles , bracelets and necklaces ; consequently that traffic depends principally on having the confidence of the women .
SOL The actual shrub of the cinnamon is only about three feet high at the most , the smallest being only a span high , and four inches thick , and it throws out shoots as low as six inches from the ground ; it has a dried up appearance , and while it is green has no scent ; the leaf is like that of the wild marjoram ; it likes a dry soil and is less fertile in wet weather ; and it stands constant clipping .
Though it grows on level ground , it flourishes among the thickest bushes and brambles , and is difficult to gather .
It can only be cut ' with the leave of the god ' — which some understand to mean Jove , but the Ethiopian name for him is Assabinus .
They sacrifice 44 oxen , goats and rams to obtain leave to cut it , though this does not include permission to do so before sunrise or after sunset .
A priest divides the twigs with a spear , and sets aside a portion for the god , while the rest is packed up in clumps by the dealer .
Another account is also given , that a share is assigned to the sun , and that the wood is divided into three portions , and then lots are cast twice to assign the shares , and the share that falls to the sun is left , and bursts out in flames of its own accord .
SOL The finest quality with cinnamon belongs to the thinnest parts of the boughs , for about a span 's length ; the second best to the next pieces for a shorter length , and so on in order ; the worst in quality is the part nearest to the roots , because it has the least amount of bark , which is the part most favoured , and consequently preference is given to the tops of the plants , where there is most bark .
The actual wood , however , is held in no esteem , because it has the bitter taste of wild marjoram : it is called wood-cinnamon ; it fetches 10 denarii a pound .
Some writers mention two kinds of cinnamon , one lighter and the other darker in colour ; and in former days the light kind was preferred , but now on the other hand the dark is praised , and even a mottled kind is preferred to the pure white .
Still , the most certain test of value is that it must not be rough , and that when rubbed together it must crumble slowly .
The lowest value is attached to it when it is soft or when the bark is falling of .
SOL The right of controlling the sale of cinnamon is vested solely in the king of the Gebbanitae , who opens the market by public proclamation .
The prices formerly were 1000 denarii a pound , but this was raised to half as much again after the forests had been burnt , so it is said , by infuriated barbarians ; but it is not absolutely certain whether this was incendiarism provoked by injustice on the part of those in power or was due to accident , as we find it stated in the authorities that the south winds that blow there are so hot that they set lire to the forests in summer .
His Majesty the emperor Vespasian was the first person to dedicate in the Temples of the Capitol and of Peace chaplets of cinnamon surrounded with embossed gold .
We once saw in the Temple of the Palatine erected in honour of his late Majesty Augustus by his consort Augusta a very heavy cinnamon-root placed in a golden bowl , out of which drops used to distil every year which hardened into grains ; this went on until the shrine in question was destroyed by fire .
SOL Casia also is a shrub , and it grows close to the plains of cinnamon , but on the mountains ; it has thicker stalks , and a thin skin rather than bark , which , in the opposite way to what we said in the case of cinnamon gains value when it falls off and thins away .
This shrub grows to a height of 4 1 / 2 feet and it has three colours : when it first sprouts up , to the length of a foot it is white , then for the next six inches it is reddish , and beyond that point it is black .
The black part is most highly esteemed , and next the part nearest to it , but the white part has no value at all .
They cut the shoots to the length of two inches , and then sew them up in newly flayed hides of animals slaughtered for the purpose , so that as they rot maggots may gnaw away the wood and hollow out the whole of the bark , which is protected from them by its bitter taste .
The bark is valued most highly when fresh , when it has a very pleasant smell and is hardly at all hot to the taste , and rather gives a slight nip with its moderate warmth ; it must be of a purple colour , and though bulky weigh very little , and the pores of the outer coats should be short and not liable to break .
This kind of casia is called by a foreign name , lada .
Another kind is near-balsam , so called because it has a scent like that of balsam , but it has a bitter taste and consequently is more useful for medicinal purposes .
just as the black kind is more employed for unguents .
No substance has a wider range of price — the best qualities sell at 50 denarii a pound and the others at 5 .
To these varieties the dealers have added one which they call Daphnis 's casia , with the further designation of near-cinnamon , and they price it at 300 denarii .
It is adulterated with styrax , and with very small sprigs of bay because of the similarity of the barks .
It is also grown in our part of the world , and I have seen it on the extreme edge of our empire , where the Rhine washes our frontier , planted among beehives ; but there it has not the scorched colour produced by the sun , and for the same reason also it has not the same scent as the southern product .
SOL From the border of the casia and cinnamon district gum-resin and aloe-wood are also imported , but they come by way of the Nabataean Cave-dwellers , who are a colony from the Nabataei .
SOL The same place is also a centre for the collection of serichatum and gabalium , the supply of which is used up by the Arabs in their own country , so that they are only known by name to our part of the world , although growing in the same country as cinnamon and casia .
However , serichatum does occasionally get through to us , and is employed by some persons as an ingredient in unguents .
It fetches up to 6 denarii a pound .
SOL The Cave-dweller Country and the Thebaid and Arabia where it separates Judea from Egypt all alike have the myrobalanum , which is grown for scent , as is shown by its name itself , which also indicates in addition that it is a nut ; it is a tree with a leaf that resembles that of the heliotrope , which we shall describe among the herbaceous plants , and a fruit the size of a hazel-nut .
The variety growing in Arabia is called the Syrian nut , and is white in colour , whereas the Thebaid kind is black ; the former is preferred for the excellent quality of the oil extracted from it , but the Thebaic for its large yield .
The Cave-dweller kind is the worst among the varieties .
Some persons prefer to these the Ethiopian behen , which has a black oily nut and a slender kernel , but the liquid squeezed out of it has a stronger scent ; it grows in level districts .
It is said that the Egyptian nut is even more oleaginons and has a thicker shell of a reddish colour , and that though it grows on marshy ground the plant is shorter and drier , whereas the Arabian variety , on the contrary , is green in colour and also smaller in size and more compact in shape because it likes mountain regions ; but the Petraean kind , coming from the town mentioned above , is a long way the best — it has a black rind and a white kernel .
Perfumiers , however , only extract the juice from the shells , but medical men also crush the kernels , gradually pouring warm water on them while pounding them .
SOL The palm-tree growing in Egypt called the adipsos is used in a similar way to the behen-nut in perfumery , and is almost as much in request ; it is green in colour , with the scent of a quince , and has no kernel inside it .
It is gathered in autumn , a little before it begins to ripen .
If left on the tree longer , it is called the palm-nut , and it turns black and has the property of making people who eat it intoxicated .
The behen-nut is priced at two denarii a pound .
The retailers also give the name of behen to the dregs of the unguent made from it .
SOL The scented reed which also grows in Arabia is shared with the Indies and Syria , the one growing in the latter country being superior to all the other kinds .
About 17 miles from the Mediterranean , between Mount Lebanon and another range of no importance — not Counter - Lebanon as some have supposed — there is a moderately wide valley near a lake the shallow parts of which dry up in summer , where 3 1 / 2 miles from the lake the scented reed and scented rush grow .
For clearly we may speak about the rush also , although I have devoted another volume to herbaceous plants , as here we are only dealing with plants that supply material for unguents .
These plants then do not differ at all in appearance from the rest of their class , but the reed has a specially fine scent which attracts people even from a long way off , and is softer to the touch ; the better variety is the one that is less brittle and that breaks in splinters rather than like a radish .
Inside the tube there is a sort of cobweb which is called the flower ; the plant containing most of this is the best .
The remaining tests of its goodness are that it should be black — white varieties are thought inferior — that it is better the shorter and thicker it is and if it is pliant in breaking .
The price of the reed is one denarius and that of the rush 5 denarii a pound .
It is reported that scented rush is also found in Campania .
SOL We have now left the countries looking on the ocean to come to those that converge towards our seas .
SOL Well , Africa , which lies below Ethiopia , in its sandy deserts distils tear-like drops of a substance called hammoniacum ; this is also the origin of the name of the Oracle of Hammon , near to which this substance is produced from a tree called metopon , after the manner of resin or gum .
There are two kinds of hammoniacum : one called thrauston ( friable ) , which is like male frankincense and is the kind most approved , and the other , greasy and resinous , which they call phyrama ( paste ) .
It is adulterated with sand , which looks as if it has stuck to it while growing ; consequently it is preferred in extremely small lumps and these as pure as possible .
The price of the best hammoniacum is 40 asses a pound .
SOL The sphagnos valued most highly is found in the province of Cyrenaica , south of these regions : others call it bryon .
The second place is held by the Cyprian kind , and the third by the Phoenician .
It is also said to grow in Egypt , and indeed in Gaul as well , and I am not prepared to doubt this ; for there are grey tufts that bear this name growing on trees , resembling the growths that we principally see on the oak , but having a superior scent .
The most highly esteemed are the whitest and most widely spreading mosses , and the bright red ones are in the second class , but no value at all is attached to the black variety ; moreover , the mosses that grow on islands and on rocks are not esteemed , nor are all those that have the scent of palm-trees and not that of their own kind .
SOL A tree found in Egypt is the cypros , which has the leaves of the jujube-tree and the white , scented seed of the coriander .
Cypros-seed is boiled in olive oil and afterwards crushed , producing the cypros of commerce , which sells at 5 denarii a pound .
The best is made from the tree grown at Canopus on the banks of the Nile , the second best at Ascalon in Judea , and the third quality on the island of Cyprus , which has a sort of sweet scent .
The cypros is said to be the same as the thorn called privet in Italy .
SOL In the same region grows the aspalathus , a white thorn of the size of a moderate-sized tree , with the flower of a rose ; the root is in request for unguents .
People say that any shrub over which a rainbow forms its arch gives out a scent as sweet as that of the aspalathus , but that if this happens in the case of an aspalathus a scent rises that is indescribably sweet .
Some call this shrub red sceptre and others sceptre .
The test of its genuineness lies in its fiery red colour , firmness to the touch and scent like that of beaver-oil .
It is sold for 5 denarii a pound .
SOL Cat-thyme also grows in Egypt , though not so good a kind as the Lydian variety , its leaves being larger and variegated ; those of the Lydian are short and very small , and have a strong scent .
SOL But every other scent ranks below balsam .
The only country to which this plant has been vouchsafed is Judea .
where formerly it grew in only two gardens , both belonging to the king ; one of them was of not more than twenty biugera in extent and the other less .
This variety of shrub was exhibited to the capital by the emperors Vespasian and Titus ; and it is a remarkable fact that ever since the time of Pompey the Great even trees have figured among the captives in our triumphal processions .
The balsam-tree is now a subject of Rome , and pays tribute together with the race to which it belongs ; it differs entirely in character from the accounts that had been given of it by Roman and foreign writers , being more like a vine than a myrtle : it has quite recently been taught to grow from mallet-shoots tied up on trellises like a vine , and it covers whole hillsides as vineyards do .
A balsam unsupported by a trellis and carrying its own weight is pruned in a similar manner when it puts oat shoots ; the use of the rake makes it thrive and sprout rapidly , bearing in its third year .
Its leaf is very near that of the tuber-apple , and it is an evergreen .
The Jews vented their wrath upon this plant as they also did upon their own lives , but the Romans protected it against them , and there have been pitched battles in defence of a shrub .
It is now cultivated by the treasury authorities , and was never before more plentiful ; but its height has not advanced beyond three feet .
SOL There are three varieties of balsam-tree : one with thin foliage like hair , called easy-to-gather ; another with a rugged appearance , curving over , of a bushy growth and with a stronger scent — they call this rough balsam , and the third tall balsam because it grows higher than the rest ; this has a smooth bark .
This last is the second best in quality , and the easy-to-gather kind is the lowest grade .
Balsam-seed tastes very like wine , and has a red colour and a rather greasy consistency ; that contained in a husk , which is lighter in weight and greener in colour , is inferior .
The branch is thicker than of that of a myrtle ; incision is made in it with a piece of glass or a stone , or with knives made of bone — it strongly dislikes having its vital parts wounded with steel , and dies off at once , though it can stand having superfluous branches pruned with a steel knife .
The hand of the operator making the incision has to be poised under skilful control , to avoid inflicting a wound going below the bark .
The juice that oozes out of the incision is called opobalsamum ; it is extremely sweet in taste , but exudes in tiny drops , the trickle being collected by means of tufts of wool in small horns and poured out of them into a new earthenware vessel to store ; it is like rather thick olive-oil and in the unfermented state is white in colour ; later on it turns red and at the same time hardens , having previously been transparent .
When Alexander the Great was campaigning in that country , it was considered a fair whole day 's work in summer to fill a single shell , and for the entire produce of a rather large garden to be six congii and of a smaller one congius , at a time moreover when its price was twice its weight in silver : whereas at the present day even a single tree produces a larger flow .
The incision is made three times in every summer , and afterwards the tree is lopped .
There is a market even for the twigs too ; within five years of the conquest of Judea the actual loppings and the shoots fetched 800,000 sesterces .
These trimmings are called wood of balsam ; they are boiled down in perfumes , and in manufacture they have taken the place of the actual juice of the shrub .
Even the bark fetches a price for drugs ; but the tears are valued most , the seed coming second , the bark third and the wood lowest .
Of the wood the sort resembling boxwood is the best , and also has the strongest scent ; the best seed is that which is largest in size and heaviest in weight , which has a biting taste and is hot in the mouth .
Balsam is adulterated with the ground-pine of Petra , which can be detected by its size , hollowness and long shape and by its weak scent and its taste like pepper .
The test of tear of balsam is that it should be thinning out in consistency , and slightly reddish , and give a strong scent when rubbed .
The second quality is white in colour , the next inferior is green and thick , and the worst kind black , inasmuch as like olive oil it deteriorates with age .
Out of all the incisions the oil that has flowed out before the formation of the seed is considered the best .
Also another mode of adulteration is by using the juice of the seed , and the fraud can be with difficulty detected by the greater bitterness of the taste ; for the proper taste is smooth , without a trace of acidity , the only pungency being in the smell .
It is also adulterated with oil of roses , of cyprus , of mastich , of behen-nut , of the turpentine-tree and of myrtle , and with resin , galbanum and wax of Cyprus , just as occasion serves ; but the worst adulteration is with gum , since this dries up on the back of the hand and sinks in water , which is a double test of the genuine article — pure tear of balsam ought to dry up likewise , but the sort with gum added to it turns brittle and forms a skin .
It can also be detected by the taste ; or when adulterated with wax or resin , by means of a hot coal , as it bums with a blacker flame .
When mixed with honey , its quality alters immediately , as it attracts flies even when held in the hand .
Moreover a drop of pure balsam thickens in warm water , settling to the bottom of the vessel , whereas when adulterated it floats on the top like oil , and if it has been tampered with by using almond-oil , a white ring forms round it .
The best test of all is that it will cause milk to curdle and will not leave stains on cloth .
In no other case is more obvious fraud practised , inasmuch as every pint bought at a sale of. confiscated property for 300 denarii when it is sold again makes 1000 denarii : so much does it pay to increase the quantity by adulteration .
The price of wood-balsam is six denarii a pound .
SOL The region of Syria beyond Phoenicia nearest to Judea produces styrax in the part round Gabala and Marathus and Mount Casius in Seleucia .
The tree has the same name ; it is similar to a quince .
Its tears have a pleasant , almost pungent scent , and inside it resembles a reed , and is full of juice .
About the rising of the Dog-star certain little maggots with wings flutter about this tree , gnawing away the wood , and consequently it is fouled with their scrapings .
The styrax esteemed next to the above-named growths comes from Pisidia , Side , Cyprus and Cilicia , and that from Crete is rated lowest ; that from Mount Amanus in Syria is valued by the medical profession , but even more by perfumiers .
In every nation a red colour and a sticky consistency are preferred , and styrax that is brown and covered with white mould is considered inferior .
It is adulterated with cedar resin or gum , and another way employs honey or bitter almonds ; all these adulterations can be detected by their taste .
The price of the best styrax is 17 denarii .
It is also produced in Pamphylia , but this is a drier and less juicy kind .
SOL Syria also supplies galbanum , which also grows on Mount Amanus ; it comes from a kind of fennel which they call stagonitis , like the resin of the same name .
The kind of galbanum most esteemed is cartilaginous , clear like hammonia-cuxa and free from all woody substance .
Even so it is adulterated with beans or with sacopenium .
Pure galbanum , if burnt , drives away snakes with its smell .
It is sold at 5 denarii a pound .
SOL Pure galbanum is only useful for medicinal purposes ; but Syria produces all-heal which is used for unguents as well .
It also grows at Psophis in Arcadia and round the spring of Erymanthus , and in Africa and in Macedonia also .
It has a peculiar stalk 7 1 / 2 feet long ; this throws out first four leaves and then six lying on the ground , which are very large and of a round shape , but the leaves on the top of the plant are like those of the olive ; the seed hangs in tufts like that of the fennel .
The juice is got by means of incisions made in the stalk at harvest time and at the root in autumn .
It is valued for whiteness when it coagulates , the next grade being assigned to juice of a pale colour , while the black is held of no value .
The price of the best quality is two denarii a pound .
SOL From this fennel the one called bear's-wort fennel differs only in the leaf , which is smaller , and has divisions like a plane-leaf .
It only grows in shady places .
Its seed , bearing the same name , resembles that of hart-wort ; it is only useful for medicine .
SOL Syria also supplies the malobathrum , a tree with a folded leaf , the colour of a leaf that has dried up ; from it oil is pressed to use for unguents , Egypt also producing it in still greater quantity .
But the kind that comes from India is valued more highly ; it is said to grow there in marshes , like the lentil , with a scent stronger than that of saffron , a darkish rough appearance , and a sort of salt taste .
The white variety is less highly spoken of ; it very quickly acquires a musty smell with age .
Malobathrum when placed under the tongue ought to taste like nard ; but its scent when it is put in slightly warmed wine surpasses any others .
In point of price at all events it approaches the marvellous , the pound ranging from one denarius to four hundred , while the leaf itself reaches 60 denarii a pound .
SOL There is also the oil of unripe berries , which is made in two varieties and by two processes , one kind being made from the olive and one from the vine .
The olive is pressed while still white , or an inferior oil is obtained from the druppa — which is the name given to an olive not yet ripe enough to eat but already beginning to change colour — the difference being that the inferior kind is green and the other white .
It is made either from the psithian vine or from the vine of Aminaea .
The vine is plucked when the grapes are the size of a chick-pea , before the rising of the Dog-star , when the first bloom is on them , and the unripe juice is obtained ; after which the , remaining pulp is left to dry in the sun — precaution being taken against nocturnal dews , by storing the grapes in an earthenware vessel — while the unripe juice is collected and at once also put to keep in a Cyprian bronze jar .
The best kind is that which is red in colour and rather bitter and dry to the taste .
Omphaeium sells at 6 denarii a pound .
There is also another way of making it , by pounding up unripe grapes in mortars ; the grapes are afterwards dried in the sun and divided up into lozenges .
SOL To the same family also belongs bryon , obtained from the catkins of the white poplar .
The best kind grows in the neighbourhood of Cnidus or Caria , in waterless districts or on dry rough ground , and a second best quality grows on the cedar in Lycia .
To the same group also belongs oenanthe , obtained from the cluster of the wild vine .
It is picked when it flowers , which is the time when it has the best scent , and it is dried in the shade on a linen sheet spread out for the purpose , and then put into casks to store .
The best kind comes from Parapotamia , the second best from Antiochia and Laodicea in Syria , and the third best from the mountains in Media ; the last kind is more useful for medicines .
Some people prefer the kind that grows in the island of Cyprus to all of these .
As for the oenanthe produced in Africa it is only used by the doctors , and is called massaris .
But all the oenanthe obtained from the white wild vine is superior to that from the black .
SOL There is also another tree that likewise serves for producing unguents , which is called by some people an elate — the Latin for which is ' fir ' — and by others a palm and by others again a spatula .
That of Hammonium is most highly spoken of , next the Egyptian variety , and then the Scythian .
It only has a scent if it grows in regions devoid of water ; it has tears of a greasy consistency , which are added to unguents to overcome the hardness of the oil .
SOL Syria also produces the kind of cinnamon called comacum ; this is a juice squeezed out of a nut , and is quite different from the juice of the true cinnamon , although it is almost equally agreeable .
Its price is 40 asses a pound .
SOL
